# S4E3 Jan 25th FULL

**Podcast:** Digital Bytes / Team Blockchain
**Audio file:** S4E3 Jan 25th FULL.mp3
**Transcribed:** 2026-03-01 (Whisper turbo)

---

## Transcript
Happy New Year. I'm still a little excited about the new year. I don't know. Maybe because it's January and it's cold out. Even by Georgia standards, it's cold.

So I feel wintry and holiday-ish. We're turning the holiday channel off Cyber FM. Look, we're talking about the 25th of January, Digital Bites. It's nearly the end of the month. Well, in three days, I'm turning off the holiday channel on Cyber FM.

That's when it will become melancholy. February. Ready for Pancake Day. So for January 25th, how do we go out with a bang? Well, we've got a couple of stories.

We're looking at how blockchains are being used by asset managers. Cryptos. Now, I think you might like this one. This is looking at sort of cryptocurrencies and the different ways that you can get exposure to this asset class. Because it's not just a matter of all the flaff of opening up a digital wallet and remembering a string of words.

There's ways you can get exposure to this sector. Without actually spending, you know, cryptocurrencies to buy a cryptocurrency. Then you've got the future of NFTs. And I know you've got some interesting stuff there about Porsche. Because believe it or not, you know, NFTs have now been embraced by loads and loads of different companies.

And after the break, we've got our old friend Tony Abel coming back in from TPX. And he's been doing some interesting sort of analysis on what's been happening with the economy and inflation. And I know he's going to talk to us a little about real estate and how it's a potentially good hedge against inflation. But, James, so that's what we've got this week. How are you?

All good? I am good. I'm alive and well. And we're doing a lot of... So, you know, we're going to have to get an article in real quick one day soon.

I think we have until March, honestly. We should discuss the fall of alt-space VR in the metaverse. It directly affects Cyber FM. We're losing our beach house. Oh, my goodness.

I think we're going to be running to spatial. But I think we're going to need an article on why these metaverses are... You know, what was that last article we did? The concert where one guy showed up? One guy showed up, but you then crashed the...

Oh, gosh, not that one. But, you know, I was talking to someone yesterday about the metaverse. And there are insurance brokers working at the City of London. And he was... Well, a couple of interesting facts.

First of all, the appetite for insuring metaverse. So we're talking about PI, professional indemnity insurance, and cyber risk insurance. And he was saying that the appetite for underwriting, there is quite a strong appetite now in Lloyd's of London and a little bit in the US, but very little in Asia in terms of underwriting risks. So the people, the underwriters and the brokers are really focused very much on London and New York, funnily enough, as the two centers for underwriting. So I guess we'll have until March to have to move the beach house, and then we're going to have to insure it.

So that never happens. It is a loss. If you think about it, we put a lot of money, a lot of effort... We'll cover that by March. March is when Altspace VR shuts down.

Okay. Well, we must do that. End of February we ought to do that, just to make sure we get it covered. Covered, right. But just going back to the insurance, James, how much do you think it costs to get 10 million pounds, or dollars worth, or pounds, doesn't really matter, of cyber insurance and professional indemnity insurance if you've got a metaverse project?

Ah. I'm going to say it's a high-risk move. Okay. So what insurance would you pay? 10 million.

For 10 million in coverage? Yeah, cover. So the annual premium? I'm going to say 10,000. 650,000.

That's four houses and a Porsche 911. Well, and that leads us into that article then about NFTs. You've been doing some digging, and just literally, we're recording this on the 27th of January because this is the 25th of January's Digital Bytes, where we look at how, where, and why blockchain technology and digital assets are being used. And bang, here you go. Here's a good example.

One of the most iconic motor companies in the world, the German Porsche brand or Porsche brand. We're never quite sure how we should say it. But James, what have they been up to with NFTs? Well, they walked themselves, they drove themselves into the NFT world. The Web3 world.

Yep. Listen, I'm a car guy. We know this, right? I'm all about cars. And you are too.

So you've got your favorites, your Jaguar. I don't think we're supposed to mock that guy anymore. He got us in trouble, right? But you did. You love the Jaguar.

And I have the BMWs. Porsche, or Porsche as you choose, comes out with NFTs. It was the same front end of a white 911 as an NFT with absolutely, the only variable that I could see was their fake license plate was the serial number. And I just, as a car guy, or even if I was a Porsche fan, you want to convince me to buy this NFT, all of us have the same exact NFT? That's not very non-fungible, is it?

Yeah, but James, the other thing is, is that is it actually a 911? Because 911s aren't called 911s anymore. They're called 99962s or 943s. They're all sorts of funny numbers. I know the original shape was a 911, but I don't think, can you go and buy a 911 these days?

A 911 is even for sale? No, because that was a, what, 87, a 93? Yeah, it was a really, really old, old sort of style. But maybe their attempt was to go back. So they decided to price it at 0.911.

And I get that. That was actually kind of, that's like an Easter egg, right? So that's in today's money, that's what, roughly? It's roughly... $1,500.

$1,500. So you've got to pay $1,500 of a picture of a car with a different number plate. That seems a bit expensive to me. Much like the theory of Porsche, I guess. You paid $1,500.

Reassuringly expensive. So I saw in the Twitterverse, people didn't get it. They didn't look, why would I pay? What's with the price? I understood it because it was a 911.

Somebody over in the factory said, ha ha, let's make the price 911. ETH, right? 0.911 ETH. They were going to mint out, or the supply, was like $7,500? Yep.

That was what they said they were going to do. And the price immediately tanked, they're saying, to 0.8. Actually, is a drop of 0.911 to 0.87 really a dump? Or is that more of a dip? Right?

Dip. But hang on, James. If they'd have issued all their 7,500 NFTs, they'd have scooped $11.25 million. They would have. That's not bad work for some digital stuff, is it?

For a JPEG of a white front end with absolutely no unique. But no one wanted to buy it. And because no one wanted to buy it, they didn't sell 7,500. They only sold, what, a couple of thousand in the end? I think they cut it off.

They cut it off at 1,242 were created at the time. And I think they canceled it. And when they did, here's the crazy part that even I don't understand. Instead of a rug pull, they gave it a turbo charge. That's a great...

You know, did they try to rug pull? Did Porsche try to rug... That's incredible. That's a horrible word to use, isn't it? Yeah, but they turbocharged the price, and it went up threefold at one stage.

Manipulation. So, if this was an anonymous developer releasing a picture of a monkey, this would have been the dirtiest NFT launch ever. But it was Porsche. Let's remind ourselves. It was Porsche.

When they pulled the supply from 7,500 to 1,242, it then... It went as high... The sales reached... The floor price went as high as 2.9 ETH. Wow.

So, what are we looking at? From .911, 1,500 bucks, to 2.9, which is 40... We'll call it 45? 45? Is that a 30%?

That's actually not a bad... Well, it's nuts. You know... Well, if the top price, to be fair, of these, went up to 2.9, so that's a 3.1... Nearly 3.2 times, you know, increase in your money.

3X. It 3X'd. But instead of them making 11 million on this issue, they ended up making about 1.8 million. Still not bad for, you know, for effectively dots and dashes. Hey, if you and I released NFTs when we made 1.8 million, you'd be happy.

We'd have a whole show dedicated to it. Yeah. But, does that mean Porsche sitting on... Yeah, but hang on, James. Does that mean Porsche are now sitting on 6,300-odd NFTs as part of the first original collection, which they'll start dripping out into the marketplace?

And so, effectively, they'll end up, if they sold all... Well, what's the current price of these things? So, as of right now, if we go to... They were on nftgo.io, and if I load that up, it says the floor price right now is 1.95, which, to be honest with you, is a success in my mind. 1.95, is that $2,200?

No, I'd say almost 3 grand. 3 grand? Well, let's just... It's almost 2 EF. Well, okay.

Oh, you're talking about the profit made. So, let's just keep it simple, and let's say Porsche start dripping this into the market. They're going to pick up another 18.9 million. So, now they've nudged the best part of 20 million. So, instead of making 11 million, they could end up making, you know, as I say, the best part of 20 million.

Maybe they have turbocharged the price. Yeah, you know what? They're ranked... They're ranked in the top 500 for volume. Their market cap is number 267 in ranking at 4,850...

Wow. No, I'm reading this wrong. 4.85,000 EF. And there's 1,502 holders. So, that's another question.

Did they not turn off minting? Well, it looks like they're still dripping them out. But, James, let's get back to the article. So, we basically... We've been looking at, you know, non-fungible tokens.

There was a lot of chat about this. Obviously, Beebles, you know, he managed to sell, you know, his... The... Something called Every Day, the first 5,000 image. And that sold for 69 million dollars a couple of years ago.

I remember that. Just one thing. Incredible. Absolutely incredible. And if any of you are interested, go and just Google the video of him as his art is being auctioned.

And it sort of suddenly jumped from sort of 5 million, 10 million, 15 million. You can see him sort of running around the front room with his kids. Oh, my goodness, we're off to Disney. And he said, no, it looks like we're going to buy Disney. That was great.

You know, he had no idea. But it caught the imagination. And then along came the Bored Ape Yacht Club, whatever that means, you know, drawings of some sort of it, you know, monkey, some sort of ape. And that's turned over, you know, millions and millions. But I think that if you look at non-fungible tokens, there's many other ways that they could actually be used.

You know, we've cited a few, like, you know, a form of payment in the metaverse, maybe for loyalty programs. there's a very, very big credit card, which I think you're going to hear all about it later on this year, who are going to be bringing out some sort of digital loyalty scheme. Looks like it might well be in the form of some sort of NFT. As we mentioned last week, I think, you know, Starbucks are using NFTs as a form of loyalty scheme themselves. And we sort of list a few examples there.

And obviously, Nike are doing the same. But NFTs in the real estate, NFTs for qualifications. You know, incredibly, if you look at your average CV when people go for a job, the percentage of people that tell porky pies, I lies, is about, well, it's well over 50%. Well over 50% of CVs are inaccurate. Whereas if you had all your qualifications on an NFT and the NFT was issued by a reputable organization, then you would know that the, what you're claiming your qualifications are actually correct inside of things.

And speculation is something which has caught the imagination. But in essence, what we think is going to happen is that NFTs are going to be used much, much more for the utility. And we were talking just before going on air, James, with the Porsche one, you know, what is, what does that NFT give you? Is it just purely a picture of a car? In which case, well, what's so special about that picture?

Okay, Porsche have issued it, but they've issued lots of pictures. Why would you spend 1500 pounds on a digital picture? Whereas if that NFT gave you access to, I don't know, race circuits or discounts off of a car or something like that, then the NFT has some sort of utility value, something underpinning it. So, that might have been it. That might have been the problem between, you know, we always talk about, especially with cars, we talk about title and insurance and, you know, car history data in an NFT.

This was just, they were jumping on the fanboy wagon as opposed to, I mean, even Bored Apes, you had access to real estate in the Metaverse, you were an exclusive club member, right? So, you had real estate, you had membership, you had perks. The, Porsche jumped into targeting, what, their well-to-do drivers? Maybe. Not even a loyalty program that they spoke of.

Wow. So, maybe that's an example of some of the press saying how not do an NFT. But, just on the car theme, just before we close this one out, interesting Lamborghini also give you NFTs, but in the Lamborghini NFT, it's for the individual car that you've been and bought. And it'll have, obviously, you've got all your paper records, but the NFT has digitized the engine number, the chassis number, the gearbox number, and actually, it acts as a way to help to authenticate the car. So, arguably, that NFT is quite a valuable bit of stuff because it can't be altered, it can't be changed, and, you know, it can't get tarnished or dirty or can't get, you know, as easy as lost as paperwork can.

But if you've got the digital NFT along with your car, it helps to increase the value of the car if the two can match because they were the original specifications that came to the manufacturer. So, that's a good example of an NFT with some sort of utility value. I know that we ran long, but I do believe that you just offered a good swing into maybe a lesson learned for Porsche on how to obtain exposure. We had to add another article about how to obtain exposure for crypto. Well, that's how, yeah, well, so, I suppose the thing that we, this isn't an advice for people to go and buy crypto.

No. But if you look at the performance, you know, we just did a snapshot over the last 30 days and you got things like, so really, the beginning of this year, you got companies like Solana up 110%, something called Taboo, a token up 300%. You know, good old Bitcoin is, you know, storming along up, nearly up 40%. So, once you start seeing these numbers, it's going to grab people's attention and people are going to look, oh, well, I'll just go and buy some cryptocurrencies. Well, there's a number of different ways that you can actually go out buying or getting crypto exposure.

And despite the fact that according to crypto.com, there's now over 425 million people that own crypto in actual wallets. I suspect there's more than that that have got exposure because, you know, you could go and buy a Nasdaq company like MicroStrategy or Marathon or Coinbase. All of these companies, Marathon has nearly 3 billion worth of crypto. Marathon has 230 million. Coinbase has over 200 million.

So, as the cryptocurrency market goes up, all of those stocks ought to increase in value, if nothing else, because of the fact that they've got exposure to the underlying asset class. Whereas here in the UK, we've got a blockchain mining company called Argo or another business which is really quite interesting is Kasei. K-A-S-E-I. And that's quoted in the Aquis Exchange and that's basically a portfolio of cryptocurrencies managed by a couple of ex-investment bankers. In the US, if you want to, you can get exposure to Bitcoin via the Bitcoin Strategy Professional Fund, which is basically a mutual fund.

And then, what I did find quite interesting is that we looked into and we've managed to find a list of 840 crypto hedge funds and venture capital funds. And so, the market is really expanding and we're going to see more and more funds. And if you remember our old pharaoh, Peter Habernasch from Arrow Capital, well, there you go, that's a fund of funds. That's a fund which invests in lots of different crypto funds. So, you've got a real wide exposure of how to get involved in it.

And then, finally, I just want to finish off by talking about some of the other companies that are exposed to the crypto area. So, you could buy an ETF. We've got the Amplified Transformational Data Sharing ETF, which is 400 million in size. And that's got exposure to companies like PayPal, Square. And these companies, although they're not crypto companies, they are engaged, PayPal and Square both deal in cryptocurrencies as a form of payment.

And therefore, if more and more people are using cryptos, then the chances are they're going to be using PayPal. And PayPal, I've actually seen their volume of business they've been doing on cryptocurrencies. You know, it's really grown a lot. But finally, James, I just want to remind people, if you don't own any of this stuff or you want to top up, no one knows when the right time is to buy and sell. So, anything that tells you now is a great time to buy or sell, take it with a huge bucket of salt.

But if you want a bit of exposure, maybe the best bet is to put some money away on a regular basis. The old pound, the old dollar cost averaging or pound cost averaging or yen cost averaging. And we looked into, once again, if you put 50, we've put dollars. But that could be yen, could be pounds, it could be French francs, sorry, Swiss francs. And 50 every month going into Bitcoin, you'd have actually saved 2,450 pounds, dollars, yen over the last five years.

Well, it's worth today 10,000. And bearing in mind that Bitcoin is a third of its highest price. It's trading right about 22,000, 23,000. Today, it was at one stage up to 64,000. So, you know, smoothing out the volatility of regular savings makes a huge difference when you've got a volatile asset class like cryptocurrencies.

So, that may be a good way to get some sort of exposure. Yeah, it's how you, like you say, dip your toe in the water to just become accustomed to it, right? And going back to the Porsche NFT, you had to have Ethereum on you in order to get it. So, how do you get the Ethereum? Yeah.

And I like that you referenced Uphold. Uphold, and, you know, that's, you got custody, you got non-custodial, you hear a lot of people say, not your keys, not your crypto, and there's so many different ways to get that exposure, whether or not you can move it, like in the hedge funds, you're not moving your crypto at all, but if you're on Uphold, you might not own the key to the wallet, but you have the ability to go buy that NFT. So, there's so many different levels of, of, maybe like tiers is a good word to use in terms of your exposure to crypto. Yeah, and that's, it's, but the thing is, I don't even care about, you know, what's it going to be next week? You know, what if I just wanted that NFT?

I want that NFT at that time. Yep. So many people focus on, you know, I'm going to be a bazillionaire in 35 years, and, and you know what, I don't know, probably not, right? How many of us are going to be? But I, I'm more of the currency guy, right?

Use it, use it to buy a soda, or an NFT. Enjoy it. Yeah, but those, those Bitcoins that you bought to buy your sandwich, that cheese and bacon sandwich, yeah, that was an expensive sandwich. That became an expensive, but that, so that went with gold as well, right? Absolutely.

Absolutely. All right, James, we better, we better crack on. So coming up after the break, we've got Anthony Abel from TPX coming up, and he's going to be talking about the new model, digital assets, a type of the, the economy with inflation resistant money coming to a city near you and looking at how, you know, we've got it, we've got a problem of inflation. At the moment, people are saying it's possibly under control. Inflation come, has come down a little bit in the States, come down a tiny bit here in Europe, and therefore interest rates look like they may not go any higher.

I'm personally, I'm not quite so convinced. I think given the huge amount of capital that's been pumped into the economy, we could well see inflation going ahead a bit further. But yeah, so we've got Tony coming up after the break. Yeah, actually, this will be his third run, right? Yeah.

Teach me all about fragmenting off my house. That's true. But how do we get these articles real quick? I got to get over to teamblockchain.net and make sure everything's functioning. Fantastic.

Yeah, if you want to get a physical hard copy, just go to teamblockchain.net. And if you've got any questions, queries, always happy to answer those. Just reach out to James Tyler at cyber.fm or myself, Johnny Fry. We're both on LinkedIn and we do this every week and we'll speak to you in a few moments after this break and bring back Tony. Thank you.

Hey, we're back. Johnny Fry and I. I like that rhyme. I'm going to make a poem out of it one day. I might use chat GPT to write an entire poem.

Yeah, you could be a poet little, do you know it? Johnny Fry and I are going to be sitting down with Anthony Abel over at TPX. Gotten a few, a few articles out of TPX with the real estate and all that and the property exchanges. But this week, what'd they write an article about? Well, it's probably got to be the longest title we've had for a while.

The new model digital asset economy with inflation resistant money coming to a city near you. Tony, you're getting more verbose as we have more articles from you. What's going on? Must be old age. What can I say?

Guys, thanks for having me back on. Yeah, no, we're very much trying to elicit into the broader audience a higher level of understanding of how our economy works and the effect of inflation on it. And so very much what we're leading with here is our focus on moving to what we call the digital asset economy, obviously based on our blockchain technologies and all. But it's a new, exciting world. And it has some rather nice attributes of being inflation resistant.

And that, of course, is of a keen interest to a lot of people right now. OK, so Tony, we've got the, you know, inflation's dead. It's all gone. You know, the inflation's falling in America. It fell by 0.1% in the UK.

So what's the big deal? 0.1%? Slow down, big spender. Yeah, well, as many of us have said, and even our chancellor here in the UK has been keen to point out, we ain't done yet. So yes, there are aspects where we're seeing some things start to level down a little bit.

So obviously, our energy prices are starting to get a little more sensible and people are stopping to trying to hike it up beyond the pale. But that's still in the supply chain. We still have a lot of issues there. That's still going to affect us for a while. But intrinsically and down to the systemic and endemic issues of our economies, and this is part of the point of the article, is that a lot of these issues are historic.

Putin didn't cause inflation. The energy didn't cause inflation. That was already going to happen and in 2017, we modelled it and we said it, you know, we anticipated double-digit inflation around this point in time and we built our exchanges to specifically support that type of economy. Okay, so I know one of your concerns, Tony, you've got an interesting chart here from Fred St. Louis talking about U.S.

money supply. Yes. Listeners can't see the chart, but can you explain what's been happening to money supply? But both in the U.S. and also back in Blighty, both seem to be, you know, pumping out cash, so to speak.

Well, I mean, for some of the listeners on this, you know, the classic sort of the money machine goes burr. That's what we'd be facing. and that's not just about the pandemic and all the stimulation payments, as I said, they put out there, you know, where they were beating the economy to drive consumption. Actually, it goes far deeper than that and it's much more historic and depending upon your perception of history, it goes back either 50 years to when we went off the gold standard or 80 years if you look at the longer cycles and what's happened there. Ray Dalio and his writings are always a great one for this one, pointing out the patterns of history and how they recur.

And so we're part of that world. We think in macro terms and we anticipate that this current change that we're seeing is a macro change. It's systemic, it's endemic, it's part of our system. We're carrying too much debt in our economies and that's been building up over a long period of time. That's personal, government, you name it, it's too much debt in the system.

Corporate debt, that's not exactly small, is it? Corporate debt, national debt, our governments have been spending like there's no tomorrow and if they keep on doing it, there won't be a tomorrow and that's part of the issue. This is not new and to lay the worst fears of your listeners here, this is not new. This has happened many times over history. You just have to be able to look back far enough to realise it.

So how far have we got to go back? You're talking about going back to Roman times, weren't you? Well, there is this aspect that it was faster to do banking across the Mediterranean in Roman times by a sailing ship than it is today but we won't go too much into that. Otherwise, you might bore all your listeners here. No, no, the fundamental issue here is monetary inflation.

They printed up too much money at a time of too much debt. We're all to some degree addicted to it. It's quite useful stuff when you have it. Each economy needs a bit of it but they've been taking the mick as they say for quite some time now our national governments and our governments and the end result of the classic economic definition of inflation too much money chasing too much goods. Well, guess what guys?

We got too much money in the economy. Too much money chasing too few goods. Yeah, chasing too few goods but even now you see what happens typically when you have these cycles is first off you use up what's in the supply system already and that's largely where we are now. And then everybody adjusts their supply system for the fact that people don't have as much money as they had before. Well, guess what?

They produce less and when they produce less then when the demand does come back then you've got too much money chasing too few goods again. So here we go again guys and it's a rollercoaster run. So although the politicians love getting on a headline and saying look it's a little bit better as we shape 0.1 off the inflation rate in actual fact our inflation rate is going to be quite high for quite some time to come. Okay, so let's take it that inflation isn't dead and it really is going to continue to insistently sort of eat away at sort of people's capital. What has that got to do with your title and you're saying the new model the digital asset economy you're telling people to go and buy a lot of crypto or something?

I would suggest they think twice before doing so. The issue we always face here is this one is in times of inflation that old adage safe as houses you know this aspect of investing or holding your money in the asset of the land whether that be productive farmland or whether it be houses that people live in is that generally those types of assets do quite well over time because they're deemed to be inflation resistant. The reason I don't know the reason is there's more demand for them than there is supply. We're not printing up any more fields or houses as such. We are building houses slowly but not at the rate of demand and so there's always this aspect of more demand than there is supply and that keeps the house stock so to speak the asset the physical asset of property more buoyant than a lot of other assets because everybody has to have somewhere to live and generally work and so therefore that asset class does quite well and that's what we're anticipating except what's changing now is that for the first time ever you can take property and use it as money itself and if you take that attribute of inflation resistant aspect of property by turning it into a digital asset which people can use in payment for goods and services and indeed your salary for the future then all of a sudden you've created an inflation resistant money itself and that's interesting that's what's happening right now out there.

Okay so we've got the well you come up with an amazing statistic well not you have but Savills that the size of the real estate market is what 300 and what 326 trillion that's a heck of a lot of notes. Well as I keep inflating the money the value of the money that's denominated and I'd argue it's even higher than that now but then you have this aspect of nominal value and real value but again the conversation for another day what's actually happening it's a very big asset property worldwide is a very big asset and it doesn't move and so it's called what we call an intrinsic value asset you I most of your listeners live somewhere we have a house or we live in a house or a property it's real it doesn't move you can see it on Google Maps it has profile it has history it has trust and there comes the bigger point is intrinsic value assets have trust property is an intrinsic value asset extrinsic value asset i.e. what someone is willing to pay for something generally doesn't have trust and so therefore a NFT I can tell you a hilarious story about an invisible statue NFT that's a non-fungible token that they're trading in the crypto world it was truly invisible they lost it they found it they claimed on insurance it is quite a story but it fundamentally never existed but it actually got quite a high price because the traders out there realized that it's a very convenient way to create value albeit from a sleight of hand and then trade that value and they like trading it up they've tried it down they don't really care what the asset is so an extrinsic value is something that other people will pay money for and they'll deem what price they want to pay what they want to pay for that item but that doesn't really does it really exist or doesn't it exist most of the traders in the world don't really care and therein lies the difference between an intrinsic value asset based economy and an extrinsic value crypto based economy if you want to put it that way okay so real estate looking another way could be seen as a decentralized asset it's not reliant on a centralized entity like a central bank or a government unlike cash where cash is obviously very centralized and you can create more debt as we've seen in many of the parts of the world whereas a decentralized asset so real estate bitcoin you could argue but certainly gold silver and things like that you can't just make more of it you can go and mine more but there is a there is a physical limitation on the actual stock the actual amount of it so what you're saying if there was a way to buy parts of a property because it's been digitized then more investors could still be exposed to what should be reflation resistant asset i real estate is that the crux of what you're talking about here then that's exactly it I mean you know there's this lovely phrase that's good to use occasionally in our industry the democratization of the ownership of property is all of a sudden we make it affordable the anti-up in the big poker game of life when it comes to property so to speak is now affordable you can buy a piece of slice of property the title of property recognized by governments land registries around the world under law institutional grade is that you can you can buy a slice of property now and own it yourself and cut out all the middlemen and to make property valuable that way is something that's never been done before and so what we've been working on for five years when we model this out we use central bank data for some of the modeling that we were mentioning in this call today is that when we model it all out we realize that in a change of economic systems which is exactly the same as happened many times over in history too much debt debasing of the currencies etc etc putting too much tin in the gold coin so to speak is that you end up moving back to some form of asset based economy and we decided to take that 326 trillion that Saville's pointed out exists in the world and turn that effectively into the new world currency okay so so it's interesting you're not alone in terms of looking to use blockchain technology in the in the real estate market there's obviously a number of companies that are out there fractionalizing tokenizing real estate there's also a company called Property Exchange Australia and what they're doing is they're enabling people to buy and sell property or remortgage property using a blockchain what's interesting if you go on to PEXA Property Exchange Australia you'll find it very very difficult to find any mention of blockchain yet at the moment roughly 80% of all mortgages in Australia are being run on the PEXA platform so clearly blockchain technology is overcoming some of the concerns that some people have around speed and scalability but but the blockchain that you've developed for the for TPX can that handle many transactions a minute because obviously if we're talking about lots of money we want to make sure that if I buy a slice of your house A you can't sell it twice and B you know you can't sell it while I sell twice at the same time if that makes sense well yeah yeah we design this very carefully I don't tend to go deep deep into the technical layers but if you look at Visa card they're doing 27,000 transactions a second we're looking to do about 270,000 transactions a second on these chains by the way we designed them because they're distributed you don't do all the computing in one place is you decentralize them and it allows you to do a broader base and that allows you to speed up the speeds as well and so what about the worry you know there's been a lot of talk in the press about the need to you know not your keys not your money and you know trusting you know third parties with you know with your house or with cash how can you sort of get around those concerns then well the systems that we developed don't have any custodials so you move directly from the owner one owner to another and they hold it directly inside the warehouse yeah so we don't we don't have any that lovely thing when I'm talking to the regulators we don't have a custodial based system we're a transport company we move we create the ability for people to buy and sell property directly the best way to look at it is a bit like an Amazon you can now buy it directly like you can buy all things on Amazon now this is a thing it's a title of a property and it's deemed by the regulators not to be a security by the virtue of the way we designed it and you're buying a title of a property and you sell it to somebody else there is no middlemen in our systems there is no margin accounts there's no leverage you own it or you don't own it it's binary and that's a very important feature because when we take the property certificates they're designed very specifically to be able to use directly in payment systems and so therefore there is no loan no margins no trading of the data etc etc for somebody else's advantage we level the playing field between a Goldman Sachs and the retail marketplace and that's never been done before all right so despite the very long title what you're really saying inflation isn't dead there's far too much debt around and just look at the long-term performance of real estate and it's it's been a pretty good hedge against inflation and now it's possible to get exposure to real estate in a digitized format that's it that's where the world is going to and it's not just us there are other players in the field as you mentioned some of them you know they're all playing in the field but the issue is is how do you create liquidity around the asset and that's why we we've worked with the regulators with the banks the institutions to create a institutional grade system that allows everybody to play in a level playing field and make that asset a liquid tradable asset class because ultimately in the best as I finish on that article the best will in the world in the future would you want to be paid with a high inflation depreciating fiat currency or would you want to be paid with a highly volatile a questionable value crypto or would you rather get your next salary check from something that's made out of property where everybody knows precisely what the value is every second or every day and you very difficult to inflate that away so that's where we're going okay James any thoughts queries questions or forever hold your peace as I say when you're in church you're about to get married well you know I think I exceded last time but maybe I forgot the you're talking about the you know the certificate of transfer because it's an exchange like you said you're just acting as a transport for really buying a piece of a house to keep it dumb right so does that remove the need for and is that the right thing to say does it lessen the requirements of like title insurance and title searching and basically that whole closing process that you go through if I was to say I went on a TPX and and I bought an entire home could I do that perfectly possible yeah yes you can from our point of view the point is this one is history has a wonderful habit of spotting the patterns and dare I say it spotting others malfeasants malfeasance in this way and so what we've done is we've mirrored the existing workflow processes you still have to do the search and the survey in the traditional conveyancing process someone needs to check that the property is there it's real it's as it is represented verified it validated it audited and making sure that the on ramps for putting a digital asset such as someone's house which is a primary asset for most people in their lives is done properly and it's done securely and it becomes something that everybody has absolute trust in so we actually emulate what's already out there so title insurances all the insurances if the property burns down is hazard insurance anybody who holds a title certificate gets paid and it's very purposely designed that way to make sure that we maintain the value of that title certificate in the payment system of course you have to have the back end system that maintains its integrity throughout its life and that's what we've done with the exchanges being on a blockchain do you do you publish the idea at all about resistance to say title theft yes well the issue that we always had was when we designed all this is we realized that an Ethereum chain or other chains simply weren't up to the task they're too slow you're not going to wait 11 minutes for your cup of coffee at Starbucks to be paid for by a title certificate you have to have something that's much much faster so we built a chain that's much much faster in the ecosystem that we use we use military great technology to overcome some of the nation state threat issues where we know that the various nation states I'll leave them nameless here will have a go at trying to steal whatever they can get their hands on quite honestly you also have to make sure that in the process that your processes are correct Russians for example notorious for stealing your home literally and then putting it on the market while you're on holiday and you come back and find somebody else living there true story it's wild in America they're doing that yeah exactly so you have to have the trusted mechanisms and you have to have someone who's not just thank you very much I've got your digital asset on my exchange see ya no what you actually have to have is an auditing a live auditing a live monitoring process to make sure that the asset like it is hope for any company that's listed on a public exchange you want to make sure they're live they're kicking and they're doing their filing on time and they are what they say they are and there's somebody there who's keeping an eye on them to make sure that they're meeting those necessarily filing dates and the standard of the asset that sits on the exchange is up to the requirement of that exchange so we as exchange operators have very much designed ourselves to do that policing function surveillance monitoring making sure that people aren't gaming the price etc etc we manage all of those processes as you hope an institutional grade exchange should well I'm sold when timeshare but Tony it's I appreciate that when we start talking about some sort of macroeconomic issues some people glaze over others find it absolutely fascinating because at the end of the day what we're talking about is you know something that impacts on all of us you know high inflation is something which certainly fortunately for the last couple of decades we've not really had to worry about but you know I must confess I share your sentiment that I think that inflation will not just go away and I was actually reading something over the weekend from Morgan Stanley and they were saying that oil prices for example are going to go back up from the sort of $80 a barrel mark back up to well over $100, $105 a barrel and that's just going to give again you know cost of inflation will rise accordingly but thank you for coming on the show my pleasure how's the best way people can get rid resuming on LinkedIn yeah no come find me on LinkedIn Anthony Abel you'll find me there A-N-T-O-N-Y A-B-E-L-L and you'll find the exchanges at www.tpx-global.com and on design we'll have an exchange coming to a city near you soon brilliant okay well Tony thank you very much indeed and we will be featuring soon as you get your first exchange up and running James that's another edition of Digital Bytes and thank you for you and the team for everything this week and we'll be back next week with another edition meanwhile if you'd like to get a physical copy of what Tony's written about you can either contact cyber.fm and there's a link on that site or just go to teamblockchain.net and you can sign yourself up to receive Digital Bytes every week into your inbox every Wednesday so James as they say that's a wrap
