---
title: "Crypto sanctions and geopolitics"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/crypto-sanctions-and-geopolitics"
---

# Crypto sanctions and geopolitics

*By Jonny Fry | *

The global financial system has long been used as a geopolitical weapon. Sanctions imposed by countries such as the United States, the European Union, and global entities such as the United Nations aim to restrict access to the international banking system, pressure governments and limit funding for prohibited activities. Traditionally, these sanctions have relied on institutions such as [SWIFT (Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication)](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/swift.asp) and central banks to enforce compliance. However, the rise of decentralised cryptocurrencies has introduced a new challenge: a borderless, permissionless financial system that operates beyond the reach of traditional regulatory bodies. As a result, nations facing economic sanctions (i.e. Russia, Iran and North Korea) are increasingly leveraging cryptocurrencies to bypass financial restrictions, fund operations and conduct international trade. Nonetheless, we do need to crypto crime in perspective. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime estimates up to [5% of global GDP](https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/money-laundering/globalization.html) is laundered each year (maybe as much as $2 trillion) and a recent report from [Chainanalysis](https://go.chainalysis.com/2025-Crypto-Crime-Report.html) estimates crypto hacks and heist to be 0.7% of transactions.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!I3kx!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F9e58849d-4e1a-417c-91c0-a873a844a0fc_1004x620.png)

Source: TeamBlockchain/[Chainanalysis](https://go.chainalysis.com/2025-Crypto-Crime-Report.html)

Cryptocurrencies themselves offer decentralisation, pseudonymity and global accessibility, making them difficult for governments to regulate. And unlike traditional financial systems, which rely on banks and centralised intermediaries, cryptocurrencies typically operate on decentralised blockchain networks. Transactions occur peer-to-peer without needing approval from financial institutions, so enabling payments to be possible outside of state-controlled and/or regulated banking systems. Another key advantage is pseudonymity; whilst not entirely anonymous, crypto transactions can be conducted without directly revealing personal identities and this allows sanctioned entities to transact without easily being detected by regulators. Furthermore, although blockchain transactions are transparent and traceable, illicit actors often employ sophisticated techniques such as [coin mixing](https://www.chainalysis.com/blog/crypto-mixers/) services and privacy-focused digital assets to obscure their financial activities. However, despite this, the nefarious actors do not always have it to suit themselves - [Europol closed down ChipMixer and seized $40million](https://www.europol.europa.eu/media-press/newsroom/news/one-of-darkwebs-largest-cryptocurrency-laundromats-washed-out) of what it claims were illicit funds: “ _One of the dark web’s largest cryptocurrency laundromats washed ou_ t.” Cryptocurrencies are also globally accessible. Irrespective of traditional financial institutions being heavily monitored by regulatory bodies and sanctioned nations finding it increasingly difficult to conduct cross-border transactions, cryptocurrencies allow direct, borderless transactions without relying on third-party banks. This therefore certainly makes them an attractive alternative for those countries struggling with currency devaluation, financial restrictions or trade embargoes.

**Case studies of crypto use by sanctioned states**

> · **Russia: a financial escape hatch from western sanctions**

Following its invasion of Ukraine in 2022, Russia faced extensive economic sanctions from Western nations. These included restrictions on SWIFT access, asset freezes and embargoes on trade and financial transactions. The impact was immediate: Russian banks were cut off from international financial systems, and the rouble faced massive devaluation. In response, Russia explored various crypto strategies to mitigate the economic damage. The Russian government accelerated the development of the digital rouble - its central bank digital currency (CBDC) - to facilitate transactions without relying on the global banking system. Reports also suggested that Russian entities were using stablecoins such as Tether (USDT) to conduct international trade, allowing them to circumvent traditional banking restrictions. Meanwhile, [Bitcoin mining also became a key strategy.](https://www.gisreportsonline.com/r/russia-crypto-mining/) Russia, rich in energy resources, leveraged its vast oil and natural gas reserves to expand crypto mining operations. By mining Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies, Russia converted its excess energy supply into digital assets that could be used for economic activity. Additionally, Russian cybercriminal groups were found engaging in ransomware attacks, demanding payments in cryptocurrencies to finance operations. Darknet transactions also increased as Russian-affiliated entities used the anonymity of blockchain-based services to trade illicit goods and services.

> · **Iran: using Bitcoin mining to offset sanctions**

Iran has long faced severe sanctions due to its nuclear program, restricting its ability to conduct international financial transactions. The country found a creative way to leverage cryptocurrency to counteract this economic pressure, accounting for [over 3% of Bitcoins that are mined](https://crystalintelligence.com/investigations/beyond-the-headlines-of-irans-crypto-usage/#:~:text=Estimates%20from%202022%20indicate%20that,distributor%2C%20Tavanir%2C%20and%20miners.). With its abundance of cheap, subsidised electricity, Iran became a major player in Bitcoin mining. By converting electricity into Bitcoin, Iran effectively monetised its energy resources in a way that bypassed Western banking restrictions. This strategy allowed Iran to generate new sources of revenue, which could be used for both domestic economic stability and international trade. Iran has also explored the use of cryptocurrencies for trade settlements. Reports suggest that Iran accepted Bitcoin and other digital assets as payment for oil exports, allowing the country to evade the traditional banking system. By directly transacting with countries such as China, Russia and Venezuela, Iran was able to maintain some level of trade despite strict US sanctions.

> · **North Korea: cyber heists and crypto laundering**

North Korea has perhaps been the most aggressive nation in leveraging cryptocurrency for illicit activities. Facing one of the strictest sanction regimes in the world, North Korea has relied on cyber warfare, hacking and cryptocurrency theft to generate funds. Indeed,[ back in 2018, Sky News](https://news.sky.com/story/north-korean-hackers-mining-cryptocurrency-monero-11192924) reported North Korea’s various activities hacking attacks! The country’s state-sponsored hacking groups, such as Lazarus, have alleged to have recently been thought to be behind the [$1.5billion raid on the Bybit wallet](https://westoahu.hawaii.edu/cyber/global-weekly-exec-summary/lazarus-group-steals-1-5-billion/) through sophisticated cyber-attacks. These hackers target cryptocurrency exchanges, DeFi platforms and individual wallets to steal digital assets. The stolen funds are then laundered through crypto-mixing services, converted into privacy coins such as Monero and funnelled back into North Korea’s economy. The country has also been linked to various ransomware attacks and online fraud schemes. By demanding ransom payments in cryptocurrency, the North Korea generates illicit revenue without relying on traditional financial systems.

In addition, the US government has taken an aggressive approach to regulating crypto transactions linked to sanctioned entities. The [Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC)](https://ofac.treasury.gov/) has actively blacklisted cryptocurrency wallets associated with illicit activities. Exchanges that fail to comply with US regulations face legal action, and companies facilitating crypto transactions for sanctioned individuals risk severe penalties. Meanwhile, the European Union has introduced new measures to prevent cryptocurrencies from being used as a loophole for sanctions evasion. Under the [Markets in Crypto-Assets Regulation (MiCA)](https://www.investopedia.com/what-is-market-in-crypto-assets-6751039), the EU has strengthened compliance requirements for exchanges and financial institutions handling digital assets. European regulators have also prohibited large crypto transactions between EU citizens and Russian entities, making it more difficult for sanctioned nations to use digital assets for financial operations.

Furthermore,**** the [Financial Action Task Force (FATF)](https://www.finma.ch/en/finma/international-activities/policy-and-regulation/fatf/) has urged member states to adopt strict anti-money laundering (AML) and know your customer (KYC) regulations for cryptocurrency transactions. The G20 and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) are also exploring ways to establish a coordinated global regulatory framework for digital assets to prevent illicit financial activity.

**The future of crypto sanctions and geopolitical conflicts**

Certainly, the increasing use of digital assets by sanctioned nations presents both challenges and opportunities. As governments tighten regulations, new strategies will emerge in the ongoing cat-and-mouse game between regulators and illicit actors; countries facing sanctions will likely accelerate the development of central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) as an alternative financial network. Enhanced blockchain surveillance and compliance measures will continue to evolve, with governments investing in sophisticated tracking technologies to prevent illicit transactions. Meanwhile, privacy-focused cryptocurrencies and decentralised finance (DeFi) platforms will see increased adoption among sanctioned entities. Cyber warfare and crypto theft will continue to play a major role in economic conflicts, making blockchain security a critical area of concern. The battle between financial control and decentralisation will shape the future of international conflicts, forcing governments, institutions and the crypto industry to adapt to an ever-changing geopolitical landscape. Therefore, are we watching the birth of a stateless financial system beyond global oversight, or will crypto be subsumed under the regulatory powers it once aimed to bypass? Essentially, is decentralisation empowering the oppressed - or enabling the sanctioned?