---
title: "The timeless allure of gold: from ancient currency to tokenised asset"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/the-timeless-allure-of-gold-from"
---

# The timeless allure of gold: from ancient currency to tokenised asset

*By Jonny Fry | *

Gold has long served as the cornerstone of global finance with its history as a form of money dating back to 550 BC when the [first gold coins were struck in Lydia](https://www.lbma.org.uk/wonders-of-gold/items/croesus-stater) (modern-day Turkey). Over centuries, gold evolved from a tool of commerce to the very foundation of the global monetary system. [The Gold Standard era](https://www.gold.org/history-gold/the-classical-gold-standard) enshrined its importance, linking paper money to physical reserves and shaping the financial policies of empires and nation-states alike. Even after the collapse of the Gold Standard, gold remained a symbol of wealth and a hedge against economic uncertainty. Notably, the World Gold Council has curated over 150 historical documents spanning [from 1660 to 1999 that reflect gold’s changing role](https://www.gold.org/history-gold/gold-as-currency) with the compilation beginning with the rise of the **Gold Standard (1660–1819),** featuring UK-focused documents that highlight the legal, cultural and economic groundwork laid for gold as a monetary anchor. It then transitions into the **heyday of gold (1820–1930)** , covering global debates, the establishment of legal frameworks and international agreements that cemented gold’s position in the global economy. Finally, **the post-Gold Standard period (1931–1999)** explores gold’s gradual decline in monetary policy, the collapse of the Bretton Woods system and the emergence of modern gold agreements and financial instruments.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!nLOI!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F855aba50-4b38-4f76-b21c-47bd423fb4c1_1006x556.png)

Source: TeamBlockchain/Coingeko

In today’s complex financial markets, investors have a multitude of options by which to gain exposure to gold; physical gold remains the most direct method, with bullion bars, numismatic coins and even jewellery offering tangible ownership. And for those seeking liquidity and reduced storage concerns, exchange-traded funds (ETFs) such as SPDR Gold Shares (GLD) and iShares Gold Trust (IAU) offer convenience and cost-effectiveness. Indirect exposure comes through equities such as gold mining stocks (ranging from global giants e.g. Barrick Gold, to riskier junior miners) or actively managed gold mutual funds. More advanced strategies include futures and options trading on commodities exchanges such as COMEX, whereby offering leveraged exposure but with increased risk. Swarm’s co-founder, [Philipp Pieper](https://www.linkedin.com/in/philipppieper/), considers that: "_As gold hits an all-time high of $3,000, it’s clear that the yellow metal continues to be a trusted store of value - especially in uncertain markets. But while traditional methods of holding gold remain popular, tokenized gold opens up a whole new layer of utility. On Swarm, investors can not only hold gold 1:1 backed by real assets stored in a Brinks vault, but also activate it as collateral, integrate it into on-chain strategies, and self-custody it without reliance on intermediaries. For example, between January 8 and March 14, 2025, investors who leveraged Swarm’s xGold by borrowing against it using a DeFi-lending pool on MetaStreet and then used the proceeds to buy more of the yellow metal, saw returns of over 20%. In contrast, those holding Bitcoin in the same period were down nearly 15%. That’s a clear signal that tokenized gold - when paired with DeFi infrastructure - can outperform in volatile markets.”_

He does, however, add: _“That said, tokenized gold isn’t without its challenges. It still requires a solid understanding of blockchain infrastructure, wallet management, and robust attestation processes. For institutions, regulatory clarity and operational integration are key. But for those ready to integrate traditional value into programmable finance, tokenized gold offers a powerful alternative - one that transforms a passive asset into an active financial tool.”_

Moreover, digital and savings platforms are also on the increase. Banks and fintech providers offer gold accumulation plans and digital gold services via apps such as Vaulted, Goldmoney and Kinesis. Meanwhile, gold royalty and streaming companies such as Franco-Nevada and Wheaton Precious Metals provide returns based on mining company production. And from the onset of this current year, [amid global uncertainty, central banks have maintained their strong appetite for gold](https://www.gold.org/goldhub/gold-focus/2025/03/central-banks-stay-bullish-bullion-january#:~:text=Central%20banks%20continued%20their%20strong,banks%20navigate%20heightened%20geopolitical%20risks.) or perhaps returned with renewed vigour, with net purchases totalling 18 tonnes. This ongoing accumulation certainly underscores gold’s strategic role in official reserves. In February 2024, [China’s central bank increased its gold reserves for a fourth consecutive month](https://www.reuters.com/world/china/chinas-central-bank-ups-gold-reserves-fourth-straight-month-february-2025-03-07/), reaching 73.61 million ounces valued at over $208 billion. This strategy, amid ongoing US-China tensions and inflation concerns, has helped propel gold prices to record highs. Collectively, central banks worldwide have purchased over 1,000 metric tons of gold annually for the third straight year, signalling a strong preference for gold as a reserve asset. Notably, [BRICS nations now hold over 20% of the world’s gold reserves](https://x.com/SprinterObserve/status/1847997637208809507), amounting to 6.2 tonnes - this trend underscores a shift in global monetary power and increasing scepticism toward fiat currencies, particularly the US dollar. [Fort Knox, holding a reported 147.3 million ounces of gold (worth approximately $428 billion)](https://www.mining.com/fort-knox-explainer-why-verifying-the-us-gold-reserves-matters/), remains central to the narrative of US economic strength - yet the absence of a full audit since 1953 has fuelled speculation. President Trump and Elon Musk have even discussed live-streaming an inspection - proof of gold’s enduring role in shaping public trust and monetary credibility. And, assuming it is actually there, it is fortunate that Trump is keen to verify matters and make sure the bars are not simply gold-painted lead!

As can be seen, with many assets in the modern economy, gold is being reimagined for the digital era. Tokenised gold is transforming how individuals and institutions can buy, sell and trade this age-old asset. By leveraging blockchain technology, tokenised gold combines the security and stability of physical bullion with the efficiency and accessibility of digital platforms. The most popular format is gold-backed stablecoins such as [PAX Gold (PAXG), Tether Gold (XAUT)](https://www.ledgerinsights.com/hsbc-tokenized-gold-available-to-hong-kong-retail-clients/), [Swarm Gold](https://www.kitco.com/news/article/2024-06-26/swarm-markets-releases-gold-backed-nfts-workaround-mica-regulations) and Digix Gold (DGX). These tokens are backed 1:1 with physical gold held in secure vaults and traded on digital platforms such as Binance and Coinbase. Other ways to be exposed to gold include tokenised ETFs available through platforms such as SIX Digital Exchange (SDX), on-chain marketplaces such as Matrixdock, Meld Gold and AurusGold (AWG), and decentralised finance (DeFi) protocols such as Synthetix (sXAU) or Goldfinch. Security tokens such as the Perth Mint Gold Token (PMGT) offer regulated exposure to gold, whilst apps such as Revolut and Uphold provide easy-to-access, tokenised gold accounts for retail users. Meanwhile, peer-to-peer (P2P) trading via smart contracts allows for decentralised exchange of gold tokens, removing intermediaries and lowering transaction costs. These digital formats cater to a broad spectrum of investor needs, from long-term store of value to active trading and staking. [HSBC recently trialled quantum-safe technologies for tokenised gold trading](https://fintechmagazine.com/articles/hsbc-pioneers-quantum-safe-tech-for-tokenised-gold) in partnership with quantum computing firm Quantinuum. The goal: to protect digital assets from future threats posed by quantum computers such as “store now, decrypt later” attacks, with the test involving converting HSBC’s gold tokens into Ethereum-compatible ERC-20 tokens whereby boosting interoperability and future-proofing digital infrastructure. This move follows HSBC’s 2023 rollout of tokenised gold for institutional clients, followed by Hong Kong retail clients, using blockchain technology to enable fractional ownership. The introduction of fractional ownership through blockchain and enhanced cybersecurity represents a new gold standard - merging centuries-old value with cutting-edge digital trust.

Unsurprisingly, a question often asked is: _“Could gold replace the US dollar as the reserve currency?”_ Certainly, the notion of gold supplanting the US dollar as the global reserve currency is both captivating and complex. But, whilst gold’s historical legitimacy and intrinsic value are undisputed, its practicality in modern finance does present limitations. The dollar enjoys unparalleled global liquidity, institutional trust and infrastructural integration in international trade and capital markets, however, confidence in the dollar is not immutable; persistent inflation, growing deficits and geopolitical strains may fuel interest in alternatives as a world reserve currency. Countries such as [China, India and Brazil are not only diversifying reserves into gold but some are suggesting they have a gold-backed digital currency](https://www.omfif.org/2024/12/gold-backed-digital-currency-could-be-a-game-changer-for-brics/). Indeed, tokenised gold reserves and central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) could gradually complement, rather than replace the US dollar as the world’s reserve currency. However, the biggest barrier remains operational - gold is not inherently digital. Its physical nature makes real-time, high-volume settlement difficult. Yet blockchain-powered tokenisation and quantum-safe protocols emerging, mean these challenges are being tackled head-on. Tokenised gold could become part of a hybrid global financial system, one where value is stored in a stable, historically respected asset whilst transactions occur seamlessly through digital rails.

Moreover, gold is not merely surviving the digital revolution - it is thriving within it. As central banks double down on gold holdings and blockchain reshapes financial infrastructure, gold’s role in the global economy is evolving once again. From ancient coinage to tokenised assets protected by quantum cryptography, the journey of gold reflects humanity’s pursuit of value, trust and stability. Whether or not gold replaces the dollar as the world’s reserve currency remains uncertain - but what is clear, is that gold in its new tokenised form is set to play a central role in the future of finance. For investors, institutions and policymakers, understanding and embracing this transformation could offer not just resilience - but opportunity.