---
title: "The ethics of algorithmic stablecoins"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/the-ethics-of-algorithmic-stablecoins"
---

# The ethics of algorithmic stablecoins

*By Jonny Fry | *

Algorithmic stablecoins raise a host of practical considerations including trust, transparency and potential failure points because many people think of stablecoins pegged to a fiat currency such as $, £, Yen, €, etc. However, whilst the investment objective is designed to track one of these fiat currencies, the investment strategy is far from simple and often involves a complex intersection of cryptography, economics and computer science. And unlike their centralised fiat-backed counterparts or over-collateralised crypto-backed stablecoins, algorithmic stablecoins aim to maintain a stable peg to a target asset (typically the US $) through the use of algorithms and smart contracts, rather than relying on physical reserves or excess collateral. Furthermore, whilst promising greater decentralisation and scalability, this innovative approach introduces a unique set of ethical and practical considerations that demand careful scrutiny. The moral and practical dimensions of algorithmic stablecoins raises critical issues of trust and transparency, as well as the potential of failure that necessitate a cautious and ethically informed approach to their development and adoption.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!GyH6!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F5143d698-12d4-435d-9119-4eab0a6dca10_1920x1080.png)

Source: Teamblockchain

[The allure of algorithmic stablecoins lies in their potential to achieve stability without the need for custodial intermediaries or the capital inefficiency of over-collateralisation.](https://coinmetro.com/learning-lab/algorithmic-stablecoins) Their mechanisms for maintaining the peg can vary widely, ranging from [seigniorage models](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/seigniorage.asp#:~:text=Seigniorage%20allows%20governments%20to%20earn,loss%20instead%20of%20a%20gain.) (where new tokens are issued to lower the price and tokens are burned to increase it) to more sophisticated approaches involving synthetic assets and arbitrage incentives. However, this very reliance on code and market dynamics (rather than tangible assets) raises profound ethical questions about the nature of trust, the necessity of transparency and the potential for systemic risks, and these types of stablecoins produce anything but a stable secure return for investors. Algorithmic stablecoins fundamentally shift the basis of trust from institutions or tangible assets to the perceived reliability and immutability of code. [Proponents argue that this “trustless” system, governed by transparent and auditable smart contracts, offers a superior form of trust compared to the opacity and potential for human error or malfeasance inherent in centralised systems.](https://101blockchains.com/algorithmic-stablecoins/) However, this trust in code is not without its own ethical challenges potentially because code, no matter how rigorously tested or audited, is ultimately created by humans and is therefore susceptible to errors, vulnerabilities and unintended consequences. Users placing their trust solely in the “immutability” of a smart contract may be exposed to unforeseen risks if flaws in the underlying logic are exploited - the past may well be a guide to the future, but it is not a guarantee. Hence, the ethical responsibility lies with developers to ensure the highest standards of security and thorough auditing, together with users understanding the inherent limitations and potential for bugs. The intricate mechanisms employed by many algorithmic stablecoins can be opaque and difficult for the average user to understand; this lack of transparency in the system's inner workings can erode genuine trust as users may be relying on faith rather than informed understanding. Essentially, developers have a duty to provide clear, accessible and comprehensive documentation and explanations of the algorithms and their potential risks.

However, whilst decentralisation is a core tenet of many algorithmic stablecoin projects it can also lead to a diffusion of responsibility. When failures occur, it can be a challenge to identify accountable parties or mechanisms for redress. Ethical frameworks for decentralised projects need to address issues of governance, accountability and user protection in the event of system instability or collapse. Furthermore, smart contracts, whilst often considered immutable once deployed, can sometimes be upgraded or modified through governance mechanisms and this introduces a dynamic element that can impact the trust users have placed in the initial code. Ethical considerations surrounding governance include ensuring fair and transparent decision-making processes, clearly communicating potential changes to users and mitigating the risk of malicious or self-serving upgrades. In addition, blockchain-powered algorithmic stablecoins are lauded for transparency and so offer the ability to observe transactions and smart contract code on a public ledger whereby increasing trust and accountability. Unfortunately, there are subtle ethical consequences that may well undermine transparency that is often promoted. Blockchain's public ledger is visible but the execution of algorithmic stablecoin systems relating to this openness is sometimes hindered by several factors. Moreover, the technical complexity deployed to create algorithmic stablecoins results in most consumers unable to understand the vast amounts of publicly accessible blockchain data and complex smart contract code. This knowledge/transparency gap typically means that only technical specialists can view such a stablecoin’s inner workings. Ethically, this demands a strong commitment to democratise algorithmic stablecoin mechanics and performance thorough user-friendly tools and accessible interfaces, rather than theoretical transparency. And even with technical understanding, real-world consequences can show on-chain transparency's limits. On-chain behaviour is visible, but pseudonymity conceals identities and intents and this opacity hampers transparency's capacity to hold people or entities accountable, especially for system failure or malice. Thus, ethical issues must involve exploring responsible and privacy-preserving identity and reputation in decentralised ecosystems in order to link on-chain data to real-world accountability.

Furthermore, although blockchain data is public, it may be used for transparency and market manipulation - large, skilled players can examine on-chain activities to predict smaller players' movements whereby providing unfair advantages and market instability. Ethical algorithmic stablecoin development must evaluate and apply ways to avoid such risks to level the playing field. Moreover, this transparency/confidentiality conflict is crucial - transparency builds confidence and accountability yet stablecoins may need user anonymity in critical financial transactions. System-wide openness and individual privacy are hard to balance ethically but next-generation algorithmic stablecoins must balance responsibility and user privacy to avoid this ethical problem. Moreover, algorithmic stablecoins have demonstrated a susceptibility to significant de-pegging events, with an example being Terra Lunna which destroyed over [$40billion of value](https://www.theblock.co/learn/251858/algorithmic-stablecoins-what-is-pegging-and-how-are-they-unique) often for holders of this stablecoin. Unsurprisingly, the ethical implications of these potential failure points are profound, including:

> · **systemic risk** \- the interconnectedness of the cryptocurrency ecosystem means that the failure of a significant algorithmic stablecoin could have cascading effects, potentially destabilising other protocols and assets. Developers and regulators have an ethical responsibility to understand and mitigate these systemic risks through robust design, rigorous testing and appropriate oversight.
> 
> · **financial loss** \- when algorithmic stablecoins lose their peg, users holding these assets can experience significant and rapid financial losses. The ethical obligation to protect users necessitates clear communication of risks, the development of mechanisms to mitigate potential losses (where possible) and responsible governance in the event of a de-pegging event.
> 
> · **the role of incentives and speculation** \- many algorithmic stablecoins rely on complex incentive mechanisms to maintain their peg. However, these incentives can be gamed or may fail under extreme market conditions, particularly when driven by speculation rather than genuine utility. Ethical design should prioritise robust and sustainable mechanisms that are less susceptible to manipulation and speculative bubbles.
> 
> · **governance failures** \- [the governance of algorithmic stablecoin protocols plays a critical role in their stability and resilience. Flaws in governance mechanisms, such as the concentration of voting power or the inability to react effectively to crises, can lead to system failures](https://blockapps.net/blog/exploring-the-risks-and-failures-of-algorithmic-stablecoins-in-the-crypto-market/#:~:text=Governance%20Weaknesses%3A%20During%20crises%2C%20decentralized,quickly%20enough%20to%20prevent%20collapse). Ethical governance frameworks should prioritise fairness, transparency and the long-term interests of all stakeholders.
> 
> · **the “black swan” problem** \- algorithmic stablecoins, by their very nature, rely on models and assumptions about market behaviour. However, unforeseen “[black swan](https://www.britannica.com/topic/black-swan-event)” events (highly improbable and high-impact occurrences) can overwhelm even the most sophisticated algorithms, leading to catastrophic failure. Ethically, developers should acknowledge the inherent limitations of algorithmic stability and avoid making overly confident claims about the robustness of their systems.

In addition, and due to their complexity and hazards, algorithmic stablecoins need an ethical framework for responsible development and wider acceptance. Trust, radical transparency and user safety should guide the structure and, based on these pillars, a complete ethical framework should highlight responsible innovation. It is vital to study, test and audit an algorithmic stablecoin before launching one. Proactively preventing vulnerabilities that might endanger user finances and system stability improves systems, hence must clear communication is fundamental. Developers and issuers must explain the complicated mechanics, hazards and limits of algorithmic stablecoins; active education goes beyond transparency in helping customers to choose. Furthermore, decentralised digital assets need good governance so as to manage protocol change and respond rapidly to crises and market movements by using fair, transparent and enduring processes. User education and risk awareness explain governance and algorithmic instability, hence educating individuals about these hazards and encouraging good decision-making is ethical to prevent massive financial loss. Finally, algorithmic stablecoins evolve with broad involvement - complex instrument creation, implementation and monitoring need best practices from developers, researchers and platforms. Collaboration may enhance ecosystem security, interoperability and knowledge sharing but regulatory involvement must be proactive. A moral approach entails building frameworks with regulators and these frameworks can encourage innovation whilst protecting consumers and reducing financial system risks from excessive expansion.

Algorithmic stablecoins might revolutionise digital assets, however, their use of complicated algorithms and market dynamics raises ethical questions about trust, transparency and failure. Therefore, if a larger algorithmic stablecoin were to implode and fail, it is likely to have repercussions for the whole stablecoin sector. A responsible and ethical approach demands a profound awareness of these factors, a dedication to openness and user safety and a recognition of the limitations and hazards of these new technologies. A strong ethical compass will be needed to guide algorithmic stablecoin development and guarantee that they serve as a force for good in the financial environment, rather than causing instability and damage.