---
title: "Understanding blockchain’s role in trade finance"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/understanding-blockchains-role-in"
---

# Understanding blockchain’s role in trade finance

*By Jonny Fry | *

Fundamentally, blockchain is a decentralised digital ledger that records transactions across multiple computers meaning the registered transactions cannot be altered retroactively. In trade finance, blockchain applications aim to replace traditional, paper-heavy processes with streamlined digital ones as, historically, trade finance operations have involved multiple intermediaries - from banks and insurance companies to customs authorities and shipping firms. Each party maintains its own records, resulting in a lack of transparency, duplication of efforts and a heightened risk of discrepancies and fraud. Blockchain’s inherent characteristics of immutability, transparency and security address these issues by offering a single source of truth accessible to all authorised participants. By recording each step of a transaction on a blockchain, all parties involved can verify its authenticity in real time without relying on intermediaries. Smart contracts, which are self-executing contracts with the terms directly written into code, can automate payments and other critical operations once predefined conditions are met. Collectively, these capabilities suggest that blockchain could revolutionise trade finance by making it faster, cheaper, safer and more reliable. Blockchain technology’s efficiency potential in trade finance is huge. Trade finance involves numerous parties exchanging tangible papers including bills of lading, letters of credit and certificates of origin, hence verifying and reconciling these papers might take days or weeks whereby increasing administrative expenditures. Blockchains, however, can digitise and automate verification therefore reducing paper documents of which [the International Chamber of Commerce](https://thecommonwealth.org/quantitative-analysis-move-paperless-trade#:~:text=Since%20the%20beginnings%20of%20trade,text%20is%20a%20summary%20report.) estimates that “ _over 4 billion paper-based documents are being processed at any one point in time around the world.”_

**Arichain - an example of blockchain technology being used in trade finance**

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!Tsgf!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fd6b03d2a-9ebd-46fb-a0bc-7d61f7637880_1108x880.png)

Source: [X](https://x.com/Arichain_/status/1933668092691034434)

Another advantage of blockchain is security; they are cryptographically created therefore changing any section of the chain needs network consent, rendering fraud very difficult. In trade finance, examples of fraud might involve duplicate invoicing, faked shipping papers or counterfeit goods. [Eastnets](https://www.eastnets.com/blog/news/trade-based-financial-crime-the-silent-cost-of-global-fraud?utm_source=chatgpt.com) claims that “ _schemes including invoice misrepresentation and over- or under-invoicing account for estimated losses of**$1.6 trillion per year,** nearly one-third of all global fraud.” _Blockchain's tamper-proof record of transactions enable all parties to verify the origin of commodities and financial documents. Blockchain transparency also helps regulatory compliance; regulators and auditors may use real-time data to ensure transactions match legal and contractual requirements, simplifying compliance and decreasing fines. Trade financing involves complex supplier networks and document exchanges; blockchain technology tracks data and payments in real time, improving supply chain insight. Unsurprisingly, this helps firms manage inventory, forecast and interruption risk. Furthermore, financiers trust loans and credits backed by real and verifiable supply chain assets and transparency decreases delivery and payment risks. Additionally, blockchain networks can integrate [internet of things (IoT) devices](https://www.techtarget.com/iotagenda/definition/Internet-of-Things-IoT#:~:text=The%20internet%20of%20things%2C%20or,digital%20machines%20and%20consumer%20objects.) which enable automatic updates on the condition and location of goods in transit. Ultimately, this creates an even richer dataset for decision-making and risk assessment. However, challenges exist and can include:

> · **integration with legacy systems** \- integration with old systems is the biggest obstacle to blockchain adoption in trade finance, despite its promise. Financial organisations, transportation businesses and customs agencies use traditional databases and bespoke platforms. These infrastructures must be rebuilt to support blockchain, which may be costly and disruptive.**** Interoperability between blockchain networks is still developing. Blockchain risks developing “digital silos” that hinder its efficiency without shared standards and procedures. Industry collaboration is needed for blockchain platforms to connect seamlessly with one other and current systems.
> 
> · **legal and regulatory uncertainty** \- trade financing is governed by complicated international legislation. However, many of these legal frameworks predate digital ledgers, creating legal and regulatory uncertainties.**** Enforceability of smart contracts, legal recognition of blockchain-based documents and jurisdiction in cross-border conflicts are still debated. Inconsistent regulatory procedures across nations discourage banks and enterprises from using blockchain technology. These challenges are being addressed by regulators worldwide, but success is uneven. Blockchains use in trade finance will likely be conservative until liability and data privacy are clarified.
> 
> · **scalability and performance** \- blockchain network scalability and performance are issues, although becoming less and less so as blockchains have evolved and learnt how to scale. Although decentralised and safe, public blockchains such as Bitcoin and Ethereum are sluggish and energy intensive. Even better permissioned blockchains may fail to accommodate global trade's large transaction volumes.**** Blockchain platforms must perform thousands of transactions per second with excellent security and low latency for mainstream trade finance applications. Although promising, [layer-2 solutions](https://www.starknet.io/blog/layer-2-scaling-solutions/), [sharding](https://www.bitpanda.com/academy/en/lessons/what-is-sharding/) and consensus methods such as [proof of stake](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/proof-stake-pos.asp) need more development.
> 
> · **resistance to change and lack of expertise** -**** change management is difficult in any sector, including trade finance. Many stakeholders, especially in conventional financial institutions, reject emerging technologies that challenge business structures and operations.**** Market experts in blockchain are scarce. Implementing blockchain solutions demands technological expertise and awareness of trade finance's complex legal, regulatory and operational aspects. Successful deployment requires closing this skills gap.

Yet despite these obstacles, blockchain technology being deployed in trade finance offers some promising solutions - adoption hurdles are being resolved by several consortiums and experimental initiatives. The blockchain-based trade finance platform developed by [IBM we.trade](https://www.ibm.com/case-studies/wetrade-blockchain-fintech-trade-finance) has created by a coalition of major European banks and [Marco Polo,](https://www.ibm.com/case-studies/marco-polo-network) a blockchain network for open account trade finance, is showing its potential in real-world applications. These projects include standardising procedures, building stakeholder confidence and proving blockchain's commercial case. Technological advances are also improving scalability and interoperability - cross-chain interoperability protocols and hybrid blockchain models can connect blockchain networks using public and private ledgers.

Essentially, blockchain's trade finance success depends on banks, regulators, technology suppliers and business users working collaboratively. Blockchain's full potential in this field requires standardising procedures, agreeing on standards and creating an open, inclusive environment. Blockchain technology offers a transformative opportunity to revolutionise trade finance by making it more efficient, secure and transparent. Its ability to digitise and automate complex processes can significantly reduce costs, minimise fraud and improve visibility across supply chains. However, the journey toward widespread blockchain adoption is not without obstacles. Integration with entrenched legacy systems, legal and regulatory ambiguity, scalability challenges and resistance to change all pose significant barriers. Nonetheless, blockchain offers real-time transparency, automation and tamper-proof records that could transform global trade. Yet legacy systems, legal inertia and institutional resistance are slowing progress. The real friction is not technological - it is human. The question is whether the industry will modernise by design, or only after the next crisis forces its hand.