---
title: "Where do we go from here? Crypto and the state of the nation."
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/where-do-we-go-from-here-crypto-and"
---

# Where do we go from here? Crypto and the state of the nation.

*By Jonny Fry | *

Considering Bitcoin’s stellar performance, largely driven by the election of DJ Trump, it's worth taking stock of where this asset class, and digital asset technology more generally, now sits against the world more generally. If we look at the market data, the value of all crypto assets currently in circulation stands at [$2.5 trillion](https://www.coingecko.com/en/coins/bitcoin), of which Bitcoin and Ethereum represent roughly 67%. Of note, Bitcoin stands at just over 60%, with Ethereum at 7% or thereabouts. If we can infer anything from this, its market sentiment towards BTC vs. ETH, BTC is an asset class that can be sensibly incorporated in a balanced portfolio, whereas ETH is more utility oriented and, whilst it has given us stablecoins, it has yet to find broader opportunities within the commercial system of money and contracts. That will encourage the bigger tech providers to incorporate Ethereum into their broader portfolio of tech solutions, such as general ledgers, CRM systems and ERPs, which will in turn drive growth and greater efficiency within economies. If we then look at the market cap of stablecoins, it is [$233billion](https://www.coingecko.com/en/coins/bitcoin) \- the largest of which is currently Tether, or USDT, representing roughly [$144 billion](https://www.coingecko.com/en/coins/tether). Daily traded volume stands at $63bn but compared to SWIFT, that amount is still relatively small, with [SWIFT handling $5-6 trillion](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2025-02-20/us-dollar-s-use-in-global-transactions-tops-50-swift-says) in payments daily. Similarly, if one compares cryptocurrency total market cap with the market capitalisation of the [US stock market, standing at $62.2 trillion](https://siblisresearch.com/data/us-stock-market-value/), crypto represents about 5% of the US stock market.

From a financial crime perspective, Forbes estimates that roughly [$4 trillion globally](https://www.forbes.com/sites/worldeconomicforum/2024/01/17/how-the-financial-sector-can-help-restore-cooperation-in-a-divided-world/) is connected to illicit funds, as it relates to normal money, whereas the Chainalysis data suggests about [$40 billion](https://www.coindesk.com/business/2025/02/27/illicit-crypto-volume-in-2024-hit-usd40b-a-record-year-for-stablecoin-crime-chainalysis) is linked to crypto. Again, this is small fry, albeit any level of financial crime is always grave cause for concern. Finally[, 580 million people of the world’s 8 billion population hold crypto](https://assets.ctfassets.net/i0qyt2j9snzb/1ANk56jCoi3iy0cYt9mzhf/1b380f51d852fdd34ab4847af934dbc3/This_Week_in_Crypto_by_K33_Research_-_January_26.pdf). So, on a relative basis, this technology remains nascent and is very much a drop in the ocean compared to traditional traded assets, whether relating to securities, financial crime or adoption. One thing holding the industry back is institutional adoption by the banks in terms of transforming the way that they issue and settle securities. Bitcoin and Ethereum sit there every day creating new assets through proof-of-stake or proof-of-work protocols. Their infrastructure cost is marginal, relative to the many overheads associated with legacy banks issuing and settling securities; policy measures could incentivise the banks to move towards a far more efficient form of securitisation. Furthermore, the reality is that all commercial and retail money is routed via an RTGS, (real time gross settlement), a platform designed to facilitate the transfer of what is effectively central bank money, between commercial banks; in the United Kingdom, the RTGS is managed by the Bank of England. Banks run technology which routes payments into the Bank of England whether they are retail or wholesale. Thinner technology can directly interface with RTGS possibly facilitated by some form of stablecoin and this could make way for the reduction of legacy banking infrastructure, so reaping benefits for the economy in terms of the cost (which is ultimately carried by both consumers, wholesale or retail). It is a very interesting conclusion and it’s one that, at a stroke with some very clever policy measures, you could do away with some of the banking infrastructure that we currently have.

If we then look at regulation, the FCA has a rulebook of 10,000 pages. On the one hand, we have a regulator which is tied to keeping the public safe, and rightly so, but how can that allow for innovation? It makes it incredibly difficult within traditional finance to actually do anything clever or innovative. In fact, many of the TradFi products are largely commoditised anyway and further to the previous observation could be transformed via the use of stablecoin technology facing off to some form of central bank digital currency. But if we look at crypto regulation, within the UK, the principal concern there has been largely money laundering, consumer protection and the sale of derivatives to members of the public. The latest FCA consultation paper takes us to a place where they're considering market abuse and an admissions and disclosures policy. Fair enough and helpful developments, but not necessarily developments that are going to accelerate growth in the market whereby we can actually use this technology to transform the way the economy runs. The cost of payments and the cost of financial transactions are a drag on the economy and with an economy that is forecast to grow at 1.7% or thereabouts, where debt is just shy of being equal to our GDP, one wonders where are the real clever policy measures are to extract value from GDP? If we then turn our eyes to the US, its regulatory framework is massively complex. Trump has to be lauded for his vision in respect of driving this technology forward, but there has to be deep change within the way the UK the US regulatory system operates. We are dealing with digital technology, so one can argue it can be regulated digitally i.e. 24/7, 365 days a year – automatically.

Perhaps Elon might have the answer to this but, if the US could transform its regulatory framework and introduce policy measures that changed the way in which securisation, payments and banking work, that would be a massive step forward. Europe is more challenging. Consensus is required across 27 member states but should the US show some leadership, that would then trigger a wholesale change in the way that we think about and use this technology. Ultimately, where do we go from here? It will take a very bold move by a bank to move this forward but I doubt that will happen because banks are under immense pressure in any event. So, what does the future hold? Bitcoin will continue as an asset. Ethereum is immensely clever but, aside from stablecoins, it hasn't really demonstrated anything useful yet - albeit it is a massively useful technology. My money would go on merging a general ledger platform, with a stablecoin - you then end up with something a bit like a bank, but offering much more, especially if it had smart contracts on its perimeter to support commercial activity linked to ‘bank’ accounts. That would be revolutionary.