---
title: "Decentralised finance (DeFi) vs. centralised monetary policy"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/decentralised-finance-defi-vs-centralised"
---

# Decentralised finance (DeFi) vs. centralised monetary policy

*By Jonny Fry | *

[Decentralised Finance (DeFi)](https://www.investopedia.com/decentralized-finance-defi-5113835) is built around the idea of creating a decentralised financial ecosystem that operates without the need for traditional intermediaries such as banks, brokers and financial institutions. The [main companies](https://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2023/03/07/2622443/0/en/Global-Decentralized-Finance-DeFi-Market-Expected-to-Surpass-USD-232-20-Billion-by-2030-At-a-CAGR-of-Nearly-42-6-According-to-Latest-Research-Study.html) that are actively providing infrastructure in the DeFi sector are Uniswap, SushiSwap, Curve, Balancer, Aave, MakerDAO, Nexus Mutual, Cover Protocol, USDT, USDC, DAI, Melon, Set Protocol, Chainlink., Compound Labs Inc, Curve Finance, Synthetix, Bancor Network and Badger DAO. It has been estimated that the DeFi sector has grown by in excess of 45% p.a. through to 2023. DeFi is primarily powered by blockchain technology, with Ethereum being the most popular blockchain platform for hosting [decentralised applications (dApps)](https://www.techtarget.com/iotagenda/definition/blockchain-dApp) and services; in part, this is because [Ethereum was the first](https://finimize.com/content/ethereum-101-first-smart-contract-blockchain) blockchain to run smart contracts and Ethereum still has the [most number of active developers](https://www.developerreport.com/). At the heart of DeFi is the use of smart contracts which are self-executing contracts where the terms are written directly into lines of code and enforced automatically on the blockchain. This means that transactions and financial services can be carried out without the need for third-party intermediaries, providing greater transparency and a level of trust based on technology rather than centralised institutions. For example, [decentralised exchanges (DEXs)](https://cointelegraph.com/learn/articles/what-are-decentralized-exchanges-and-how-do-dexs-work) allow users to trade digital assets directly with one another, whilst lending platforms let users lend and borrow digital assets without traditional financial intermediaries.

**Monthly active developers for top ten blockchains**

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!2Hpc!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F54edfb6b-01aa-43a0-bd6a-04a06b2fac1a_1016x602.png)

Source: Teamblockchain/[Developer report](https://www.developerreport.com/)

Another significant aspect of DeFi is the use of stablecoins which are forms of digital/programmable payment solutions typically pegged to the value of a traditional asset, such as the US dollar or gold. Stablecoins enable users to transact within the DeFi ecosystem on an automated basis, not dissimilar to the way the stock markets have been using automated algorithms for years - they now account for over [60 to 75% of trading](https://www.quantifiedstrategies.com/what-percentage-of-trading-is-algorithmic/#:~:text=Algorithmic%20trading%20is%20a%20method%20of%20trading%20financial%20markets%20using,and%20major%20Asian%20capital%20markets.) on most major equity markets. However, although DeFi offers numerous benefits, it also comes with challenges. Scalability issues remain, particularly on blockchains such as Ethereum which face high transaction fees and congestion during periods of heavy use. There are also security risks, as vulnerabilities in smart contracts and platform design can lead to hacks or loss of funds. Additionally, DeFi operates in a largely unregulated space, creating uncertainty regarding its future legal status and the level of protection for users as, typically, regulators are keen to be able to hold individuals and regulated companies accountable in the event there are problems.

In contrast to the decentralised principles of DeFi, centralised monetary policy refers to the financial mechanisms employed by central banks and government institutions to control and regulate the money supply, interest rates and economic activities within a country. Central banks, such as the [US Federal Reserve](https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/what-us-federal-reserve) and the [European Central Bank](https://www.ecb.europa.eu/home/html/index.en.html), play a critical role in shaping economic conditions by making decisions that aim to stabilise the economy, control inflation and support growth. Furthermore, a primary tool of centralised monetary policy is the adjustment of interest rates; central banks raise or lower interest rates to influence borrowing and spending behaviour in the economy. When rates are low, borrowing becomes cheaper and therefore encourages spending and investment, which then stimulates economic growth. Conversely, high rates can slow down borrowing and spending, helping to manage inflation during periods of economic overheating. Central banks also control the money supply, using tools such as [open market operations (OMOs)](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/o/openmarketoperations.asp), where they buy or sell government securities/debt instruments, to inject or remove liquidity from the banking system. In times of crisis, central banks can provide emergency funding through lender of last resort functions whereby ensuring that financial institutions have access to liquidity and can maintain stability.

One of the main advantages of centralised monetary policy is the ability to respond quickly to economic challenges. Central banks can manage economic crises, such as those caused by inflation and deflation, or sudden shocks such as the 2008 financial crisis or the COVID-19 pandemic. They can also act to stabilise exchange rates and financial markets. In addition, central banks can engage in international coordination, particularly in times of global financial instability, to prevent competitive devaluation or the destabilisation of global trade and investment. However, centralised monetary policy also has its drawbacks. The centralisation of financial control means that decisions about money supply and interest rates rest in the hands of a few institutions. Moreover, the system is vulnerable to mismanagement or political influence, potentially leading to issues such as inflation, deflation or misallocation of resources. In extreme cases, such as hyperinflation, a loss of trust in the central authority can cause a complete collapse of the financial system. DeFi has a more rigid money supply as it is not possible to simply print more money, unlike central banks - although stablecoins aim to guarantee price stability in the decentralised environment by mimicking fiat currencies such as the US dollar. In addition, most decentralised protocols are neither flexible nor sensitive to macroeconomic situations, limiting the DeFi system's capacity to adapt flexibly to economic developments. However, centralised monetary policy allows central banks to dynamically modify money supply; the banks may affect inflation, employment and growth by manipulating the money supply using quantitative easing or open market operations. This flexibility also helps central banks react to economic crises, which is a major positive for a more centralised style of economic management.

However, DeFi typically lacks the mechanisms for managing economic crises. When a decentralised platform fails or is hacked, the consequences can be severe but there is no central authority to intercede and mitigate the damage. And, if a DeFi protocol experiences a bug or exploit, users may lose their funds and there is no central entity to restore confidence or provide emergency support. Centralised monetary policy, on the other hand, offers a structured response to financial crises. Central banks have the ability to inject liquidity into the economy, provide emergency loans to struggling institutions and adjust interest rates to stabilise markets, bail out banks, etc. For example, during the 2008 financial crisis, central banks around the world engaged in unprecedented actions to prevent systemic collapse. Similarly, during the COVID-19 pandemic, central banks lowered interest rates and engaged in massive monetary expansion to support global economies. Meanwhile, one of DeFi's biggest benefits is openness; a public blockchain records all transactions, allowing anybody to verify their integrity and this openness is built into the protocol whereby lowering central institution confidence. Furthermore, trust is built on code integrity and decentralised networks, not central authorities. Centralised monetary policy depends on institutional confidence and, although there are legal protections, decision-making is typically opaque. Central banks deliberate privately and opacity may lead to public scepticism, particularly if central banks' activities appear to favour specific groups or lack accountability.

Significantly,**** DeFi makes financial services accessible to everyone with an internet connection and provides access to financial goods in many countries, notably underbanked or developing ones. And by eliminating bank obstacles to lending, borrowing and trading, DeFi democratises financial services. However, traditional banking and centralised monetary policy are more restricted and many people lack financial services owing to geographical, socioeconomic or bureaucratic restrictions. In addition, although Fintech and mobile banking have increased access, many people worldwide are financially disenfranchised; according to [the World Bank, over 1.4billion people globally](https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2022/07/21/covid-19-boosted-the-adoption-of-digital-financial-services#:~:text=Globally%2C%20some%201.4%20billion%20adults,go%2C%20much%20more%20is%20needed.) do not have a bank account. For example, traditional banks frequently demand credit histories or physical infrastructure which may be difficult for rural or emerging countries. Hence, although DeFi gives customers more financial independence by eliminating third-party middlemen, lack of regulation may compromise security. Users have lost significant amounts of money due to smart contract flaws, platform failures and attacks, with no obvious redress. In contrast, centralised financial systems are heavily controlled; central banks and financial institutions must follow tight laws to safeguard customers, guarantee financial stability and combat fraud. This regulatory structure protects the financial system and builds user confidence.

In essence, both DeFi and centralised monetary policy have benefits, but neither is ideal. DeFi is transparent, inclusive and independent but scalability, security and regulation are challenges. Centralised monetary policy does offer economic stability, crisis management tools and regulatory protections, but is dependent on centralised authority and institutions which may not behave in the public interest. Therefore, instead of replacing one system with another, finance may well hybridise. The strengths of decentralised and centralised finance may be combined in the future - central banks may use blockchain technology or create [central bank digital currencies (CBDCs)](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/central-bank-digital-currency-cbdc.asp) that combine DeFi's decentralisation with conventional monetary policy's stability and regulation. The challenge is how DeFi and centralised monetary policy will grow together to keep the global financial system adaptive, safe and inclusive in a digital age.