---
title: "Green blockchains"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/green-blockchains"
---

# Green blockchains

*By Jonny Fry | *

Blockchain technology has altered businesses by delivering decentralised, secure and transparent transaction and data management solutions. However, high energy usage of [proof of work (PoW) networks](https://www.bitcoin.com/get-started/what-is-proof-of-work/), such as the Bitcoin blockchain, is one of technology's biggest environmental issues. PoW requires considerable processing power and emits a vast amount of carbon. As climate change worries increase, the blockchain community is pushing for more energy-efficient consensus processes to lessen blockchain technology's environmental impact. Hence, there is a growing shift toward energy-efficient blockchain consensus mechanisms. Bitcoin and other early blockchains employed proof of work where miners compete to solve complicated cryptographic challenges, but this method consumes a considerable amount of computer power and energy. Bitcoin uses more electricity than [Poland as powerful computers](https://www.polytechnique-insights.com/en/columns/energy/bitcoin-electricity-consumption-comparable-to-that-of-poland/#:~:text=For%20example%2C%20the%20annual%20electricity,of%20660%2C000%20Olympic%20swimming%20pools.) and miners battle to crack complex crypto graphic algorithms to be the first to earn cryptocurrencies as their rewards. Moreover, PoW has a greater environmental impact in fossil fuel-dependent mining locations with large carbon emissions. Meanwhile, smaller players face entrance difficulties due to PoW's economic inefficiency. Blockchain technology seeks decentralisation, but high energy costs and specialised gear concentrate mining power in a few major corporations.

Hence, PoW's shortcomings have led to the development of alternative consensus techniques that lower energy usage whilst ensuring blockchain network security and integrity and****[proof of stake (PoS)](https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/mckinsey-explainers/what-is-proof-of-stake) has emerged as the most widely adopted alternative to PoW. Instead of miners competing to solve puzzles, PoS selects validators based on the number of tokens they hold and are willing to "stake" as collateral. This eliminates the need for energy-intensive mining, drastically reducing the overall energy consumption of PoS-based networks. Notably, PoS is not only more energy-efficient but also secure - validators are financially incentivised to act honestly because malicious behaviour (such as attempting to attack the network) would result in the loss of their staked tokens. Moreover, the success of Ethereum’s transition from PoW to PoS with Ethereum 2 has solidified PoS as a viable green alternative for blockchain networks. Other alternatives include:

> · [Delegated proof of stake (DPoS)](https://www.ledger.com/academy/what-is-delegated-proof-of-stake-dpos) \- is a way to mine cryptocurrencies more efficiently and introduces a layer of democracy by allowing token holders to vote for a limited number of delegates who are responsible for validating transactions and securing the network. This significantly reduces the number of validators needed which, in turn, minimises the resources and energy consumed. DPoS is highly scalable therefore making it suitable for applications that require high through put. Blockchains such as EOS and TRON have successfully implemented DPoS to achieve efficient consensus while maintaining scalability.
> 
> · [Proof of authority (PoA)](https://www.coinhouse.com/insights/what-is-proof-of-authority) \- operates with a small set of pre-approved validators who are authorised to create new blocks. By reducing the number of validators involved, PoA drastically cuts energy consumption and since it does not require mining, PoA-based networks are much more energy-efficient than PoW systems. PoA is ideal for private and consortium blockchains where participants are known and trusted. Examples of networks using PoA include VeChain, which is used for supply chain management, and Ethereum’s Rinkeby testnet.
> 
> · [Proof of space and time (PoST) ](https://chiapower.org/chia-proofs-of-space/PoST/)\- is an innovative consensus mechanism that leverages unused storage space on devices rather than computational power. By utilising existing hardware, PoST reduces the energy consumption typically associated with traditional mining. PoST also promotes decentralisation by lowering hardware requirements so enabling more participants to engage in the network. One notable example of PoST in action is Chia Network, which employs this method to operate a more sustainable blockchain.

And to further optimise energy efficiency whilst balancing security and scalability, hybrid consensus models have also been developed. These models combine the strengths of multiple mechanisms to meet the diverse needs of blockchain applications. For instance, Harmony uses a combination of proof of stake (PoS) and sharding to achieve energy efficiency whilst ensuring decentralisation and scalability. In addition to these established mechanisms, new research is exploring alternatives such as ‘proof of reputation’, ‘proof of burn’ and ‘proof of history’ - each of these innovative models offers a unique approach to achieving sustainability without compromising blockchain performance. Meanwhile, the shift to energy-efficient consensus mechanisms brings several key benefits:

> · **environmental sustainability**
> 
> By reducing energy consumption, these alternative mechanisms align blockchain technology with global efforts to combat climate change, decreasing the carbon footprint of blockchain networks.
> 
> · **cost-effectiveness** Lower energy requirements translate into reduced operational costs for blockchain networks, making the technology more accessible and economically viable for both developers and users.
> 
> · **enhanced decentralisation**
> 
> With lower hardware and energy demands, energy-efficient mechanisms encourage broader participation in blockchain networks. This helps avoid the centralisation risks associated with PoW, where mining power tends to concentrate in a few large entities.
> 
> · **scalability**
> 
> Many energy-efficient mechanisms, such as DPoS and PoS, are designed to handle a higher volume of transactions, making them well-suited for large-scale applications.

However, whilst energy-efficient consensus procedures have several benefits, their widespread implementation faces various obstacles. Blockchain networks such as Bitcoin and Ethereum face technological and political challenges when switching from PoW to alternate processes. Infrastructure modifications and community consensus shifts may be gradual and controversial so making sure other procedures offer the same security and trust as PoW is crucial; if new techniques are seen as less secure, consumers and developers may resist them. Regulatory unpredictability is another issue - green blockchain efforts face ambiguity since governments and authorities are currently classifying blockchain technology. Hence, without restrictions, initiatives might struggle to obtain legitimacy, and people can be hesitant to accept new technology. Nonetheless, several blockchain projects have already embraced energy-efficient consensus mechanisms, demonstrating the feasibility of greener alternatives. Ethereum’s move to Ethereum 2, where it adopted proof of stake, marked a significant milestone in reducing its energy consumption. The transition was not only a major technical upgrade but also a statement about the future of blockchain's environmental sustainability. The Chia blockchain’s use of proof of space and time uses unused storage space so that Chia is able to maintain a decentralised and energy-efficient network whereby providing a model for sustainable blockchain operations. Meanwhile, the VeChain blockchain uses proof of authority to power its supply chain management platform - this model has helped VeChain reduce energy consumption whilst maintaining the integrity and efficiency of its network. In addition, many networks are contemplating solar or wind power with several blockchain companies investigating renewable-powered data centres to reduce carbon emissions. Furthermore, standardisation and certification are key to green blockchain growth - open and accountable industry standards and certifications will prove blockchain networks' environmental benefits. Green blockchain activities demand cross-industry cooperation and blockchain developers, environmental groups and politicians may work together to promote blockchain sustainability. Finally, green blockchain knowledge and incentives will encourage consumers and enterprises to utilise energy-efficient blockchain technologies, and the blockchain community can promote sustainability to create greener, more efficient processes.

Essentially, the shift towards energy-efficient consensus mechanisms marks a pivotal moment in blockchain technology’s evolution. By addressing environmental concerns, these mechanisms ensure that blockchain remains a sustainable and viable tool for innovation. Whilst challenges remain, the progress in developing green blockchain solutions reflects a growing commitment to aligning technology with global sustainability goals. And, as the push for energy-efficient consensus mechanisms continues, blockchain can serve as a model for how cutting-edge technology can adapt to meet the demands of an environmentally conscious world.