---
title: "Privacy coins: scapegoats or escape goals"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/privacy-coins-scapegoats-or-escape"
---

# Privacy coins: scapegoats or escape goals

*By Jonny Fry | *

Privacy coins provide financial anonymity by concealing transaction details therefore shielding users from surveillance, cyber threats and financial discrimination. They enhance business confidentiality, ensure fungibility and support financial inclusion in restrictive regimes. However, regulatory scrutiny raises concerns about their future, as regards balancing privacy with compliance. And, despite their inherent promise of anonymity and decentralisation, cryptocurrencies have faced challenges in upholding true user privacy due to the increasing prevalence of know your customer (KYC) and anti-money laundering (AML) regulations. Whilst these regulations aim to curb illicit activities, they undermine the core principle of financial privacy that cryptocurrencies were originally designed to address. Nonetheless, this does not negate the critical need for the solutions that cryptocurrencies were intended to provide. The Web3 ecosystem has actively sought to overcome these privacy hurdles, with one prominent solution lying in the development and adoption of privacy coin. However, the war on these coins has been brutal. Interestingly as below demonstrates, the size of the turnover, even for the ten largest privacy coins, varies enormously. Recently, there have been [surges in privacy coins](https://cryptopotato.com/privacy-coins-on-fire-verge-gains-51-as-trading-volume-climbs-to-908m/) such as Verge (XVG), Monero (XMR) and Zcash (ZEC), with Verge gaining 51.8% and witnessing $361M in 24-hour trading volume (the sector's total trading volume rose to $908M, reflecting renewed investor interest). Meanwhile, Monero (XMR) has [reached a two-year price high](https://decrypt.co/294741/monero-two-year-high-privacy-coins) amidst increasing interest in privacy-focused cryptocurrencies; this surge is attributed to growing demand for privacy coins such as Monero and Zcash, which offer enhanced anonymity features whereby making them popular among users seeking financial privacy. The rise also reflects broader trends in the cryptocurrency market, as privacy and decentralisation gain importance. However, privacy coins remain controversial due to regulatory scrutiny over their use in illicit activities and efforts to restrict or delist these coins persist in several regions

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!fhPD!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fe63287f0-8b06-4d40-a5a8-e808ad79cf0a_1012x612.png)

Source: Teamblockchain/[Forbes](https://www.forbes.com/digital-assets/categories/privacy-crypto-coins/?sh=2d1bf99a1fbe)

Meanwhile, Japan's Financial Services Agency (FSA) is [combatting cybercrime by targeting privacy coins](https://irishtechnews.ie/the-real-reason-japan-is-using-crypto-exchanges-to-fight-cybercrime/), such as Monero, Dash and Zcash, by banning them. The Japanese regulators believe these coins are favoured by criminals due to their strong anonymity features, making them difficult to trace. Dubai's Virtual Assets Regulatory Authority (VARA) has also [banned activities involving privacy coins](https://cryptopotato.com/dubai-forbids-operations-with-monero-zcash-and-other-privacy-coins/) citing anti-money laundering and consumer security measures. Binance has [delisted privacy coins](https://www.theblock.co/post/232751/binance-privacy-coins-delisting-europe) in certain jurisdictions such as France, Italy, Poland and Spain but [critics argue](https://irishtechnews.ie/the-real-reason-japan-is-using-crypto-exchanges-to-fight-cybercrime/) that delisting these coins from exchanges offers only a temporary solution and does not fully address the broader issues of cybercrime and money laundering. As an alternative approach, experts suggest enhancing security protocols and integrating KYC and AML measures to address the root causes. In addition, the fate of privacy coins in the US remains unclear. There are many challenges and impracticalities around banning privacy coins in the US and, despite regulatory pressures, [experts argue such](https://www.ccn.com/news/banning-privacy-coins-us-try-fail/) a ban would face legal, technical and enforcement barriers. The decentralised nature of privacy coins plus tools such as [Tor](https://www.torproject.org/) and virtual private networks (VPNs) make enforcement difficult. Interestingly, Tor, which was originally developed by the US government, uses layered encryption to anonymise online activity, therefore hiding IP addresses and browsing history. But, whilst it protects privacy and enables free expression, critics argue it also facilitates illicit activities, so raising ethical and regulatory concerns. Targeting centralised exchanges may restrict access, but peer-to-peer systems remain resilient. Recently, there was [significant price surges in Tornado Cash's TORN token (up 380%) and other privacy coins](https://decrypt.co/293796/torn-jumps-380-privacy-coins-railgun-zcash-surge-after-tornado-cash-ruling) (such as Railgun and Zcash) following a US court ruling on Tornado Cash - the ruling created uncertainty around the regulation of privacy-focused crypto tools.

This legal development highlights ongoing debates about the balance between privacy and regulatory compliance in crypto. Privacy coins benefit from increased demand as users seek decentralised and private financial tools, and the industries that can benefit from privacy coins include VPN and hosting providers, the adult industry, healthcare services, e-commerce and financial services. The US seems to be the last haven for privacy coins, but that has yet to be smooth sailing - a calm sea can only be assured after a [balance has been struck](https://bitcoinist.com/evolution-of-privacy-coins-balancing-user-anonymity-and-regulatory-compliance/) between user anonymity and regulatory compliance. However, privacy coins currently seem to be losing their allure as different bodies such as [Chainalysis have tools dedicated to revealing the anonymity of these privacy coins](https://www.chainalysis.com/blog/introducing-investigations-compliance-support-for-privacy-coins/); around the same time, CipherTrace [filed two patents for tracing Monero cryptocurrency](https://atozmarkets.com/news/ciphertrace-files-patents-tracing-monero-cryptocurrency/). Nonetheless, privacy coins are taking these developments on their feet as they have also been adapting to the change and adjusting. Monero recently revealed its [development of Full-Chain Membership Proofs](https://www.getmonero.org/2024/04/27/fcmps.html) (FCMPs), a new privacy mechanism replacing ring signatures. It enhances sender privacy by expanding anonymity sets from 16 to 100 million, mitigating statistical risks and enabling advanced features such as transaction chaining, outgoing view keys and forward secrecy. But rather than working harder to mask themselves, privacy coins should push for conversations that gives them room to breathe, because the disposition against privacy coins stem from legitimate concerns over this coin. Nonetheless, there are some genuine legitimate reasons that privacy coins are used, such as:

> · **financial privacy** \- just as people expect confidentiality with cash transactions, privacy coins allow digital transactions without surveillance from third parties, including governments, corporations and hackers.
> 
> · **protection against surveillance** \- in an era of increasing financial oversight, privacy coins shield users from invasive monitoring and potential discrimination based on their spending habits.
> 
> · **security against cyber threats** \- public blockchains such as Bitcoin allow anyone to trace transactions. Privacy coins prevent this, reducing the risk of targeted attacks, phishing or extortion based on transaction history.
> 
> · **business confidentiality** \- companies can use privacy coins to secure proprietary financial transactions, keeping competitive information (such as supplier payments or investment moves) out of public view.
> 
> · **financial inclusion** \- in oppressive regimes where governments track and censor financial activities, privacy coins offer a way for individuals to preserve economic freedom and bypass unjust financial restrictions.

It would be sagacious to look at the potential of [zkKYC (zero-knowledge know your customer)](https://www.publish0x.com/kev-nag/zkkyc-the-key-to-amlctf-compliance-while-maintaining-user-pr-xxzveyy) as a solution so as to balance regulatory compliance and user privacy in the crypto industry. zkKYC allows users to prove their identity without disclosing personal details, thus ensuring privacy whilst also meeting AML and counter-terrorist financing (CTF) obligations. This approach could prevent data breaches, improve compliance and boost crypto adoption, although challenges such as sensitive information storage remain to be solved. Exchanges and intermediaries handling privacy coins might be [required to implement compliance measures](https://cryptoslate.com/privacy-coins-under-fire-can-lawmakers-regulate-untraceable-transactions/) such as transaction auditability or third-party reporting of suspicious activities. For example, the Kyros AML Data Suite [integrates transaction thresholds into AML monitoring](https://kyrosaml.com/transaction-thresholds-in-anti-money-laundering/), improving detection accuracy and compliance with evolving regulations. The suite enhances risk-based transaction monitoring, enabling financial institutions to focus resources on high-risk activities. Indeed, if the privacy side of Web3 will not instigate these conversations, it is important regulatory bodies do because their bans would become obsolete at some point. Copenhagen Business School [succinctly explains this future](https://www.cbs.dk/en/the-press/news/why-untraceable-cryptocurrencies-are-here-to-stay): “ _If decentralised privacy-preserving cryptocurrencies become popular in the future, to the point they can be routinely exchanged without users having to convert to other currencies and systems, there is no obvious way for regulators to impose post hoc regulation.”_

Without doubt, privacy coins sit at the heart of the digital financial revolution, promising users’ anonymity, security and financial freedom. Yet they remain under fire, often scapegoated by regulators as enablers of crime, money laundering and cyber fraud. Governments and financial watchdogs worldwide have imposed bans, delisting’s and strict compliance measures, arguing that privacy-focused cryptocurrencies such as Monero and Zcash threaten financial oversight. However, are privacy coins truly the villains, or are they the last line of defence against an increasingly intrusive financial system? In an era of mass surveillance and centralised control, privacy coins offer individuals and businesses an escape goal - a means to secure transactions, preserve economic sovereignty and resist financial censorship. As regulatory frameworks tighten, the battle over privacy coins will shape the future of digital freedom: but will they be eradicated as scapegoats, or will they endure as essential escape goals in a world demanding greater financial autonomy?