---
title: "Smart cities’ use of blockchains driving urban efficiency"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/smart-cities-use-of-blockchains-driving"
---

# Smart cities’ use of blockchains driving urban efficiency

*By Jonny Fry | *

The concept of [smart cities](https://www.twi-global.com/technical-knowledge/faqs/what-is-a-smart-city) revolves around leveraging advanced technologies such as the[ internet of things (IoT)](https://www.techtarget.com/iotagenda/definition/Internet-of-Things-IoT), [artificial intelligence (AI)](https://www.britannica.com/technology/artificial-intelligence) and big data to create efficient urban systems that enhance the quality of life for residents; these cities are designed to improve urban resource management, sustainability and governance. However, although the complexity of urban systems poses significant challenges, including data silos, inefficiencies and privacy concerns, blockchain technology offers a transformative solution to these difficulties. As a decentralised, immutable and transparent ledger, blockchain has the potential to revolutionise how cities manage data, processes and transactions. In addition, by providing secure and automated systems, blockchain supports the goals of smart cities whilst also ensuring trust and accountability among stakeholders.

**Blockchains being used by smart cities**

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!e1HY!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fdc7e50a5-6fef-4a26-81d4-e8c2128a12c4_968x538.png)

Source: TeamBlockchain

The UN predicts that, by 2050[, 68% of the global population](https://www.un.org/development/desa/en/news/population/2018-revision-of-world-urbanization-prospects.html) will live in cities and urban areas. Blockchain integration in smart cities provides the foundation for more efficient and secure urban systems and one of its key contributions is the decentralisation of processes. Unlike traditional centralised systems, blockchain distributes control across multiple computers/nodes, both reducing the risks of data breaches and ensuring that no single entity has unilateral control over critical systems - this decentralisation is crucial for fostering trust in smart city infrastructures. Transparency is another fundamental advantage of using blockchain technology - by creating immutable records of transactions and operations, blockchain enables stakeholders to verify data independently and this feature is particularly valuable in governance, where transparency can enhance public trust and reduce corruption. Furthermore, blockchain’s automation capabilities (enabled through smart contracts) streamline operations by executing predefined rules without the need for intermediaries. Hence, these attributes make blockchain a promising technology for addressing some of the most pressing issues faced by urban areas.

Smart cities require energy management, especially as cities increasingly use renewable energy. Through [blockchain-powered smart grids](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11145481/#:~:text=Prosumers%20can%20exchange%20nearby%20produced,system%20by%20utilizing%20smart%20contracts.), it is possible to optimise energy delivery and consumption - that is, blockchains allow decentralised grids to trace energy flows in real time, so optimising resource allocation. Furthermore, by encouraging urban dwellers to invest in solar energy panels, making them ‘prosumers’ (i.e. producers and consumers of energy), enables them to be able to engage in peer-to-peer energy trading on a blockchain network trade from the energy their solar installations make. In turn, this method promotes renewable energy and lowers utility dependence. Blockchains also make it easier for corporations and individuals to participate in and support green energy initiatives by tokenising renewable energy credits (RECs) - globally, the RECs market was worth $13.65 billion in 2021 and is now estimated to grow to [US $111 billion by 2030](https://www.gcc.re/news/renewable-energy-certification-markets-a-global-surge-in-growth-and-challenges).

**Amount invested in the US by companies and individuals in renewables, carbon management and clean tech since 2022**

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!jDzV!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F99a90137-3ae5-49d6-a5c0-c1476744a27a_606x708.png)

Source: [Deloitte](https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/renewable-energy/renewable-energy-industry-outlook.html)

Meanwhile, it is a well-known fact that public transit systems across the world struggle with congestion, inefficiency and, in many cities, a reliance on outmoded paper-based tickets. In smart cities, blockchain technology allows unified ticketing platforms that incorporate many transit modes, therefore solving these concerns. Users can use a single token or wallet for buses, trains and other transit services, meaning the user experience is more streamlined. Blockchains also create decentralised networks that link riders and drivers directly, eliminating intermediary costs and improving ride-sharing efficiency (which has been [Uber’s experience when using blockchains](https://rejolut.com/blog/blockchain-in-ridesharing/#:~:text=By%20leveraging%20blockchain%20technology%2C%20Uber,to%20a%20number%20of%20benefits.)). Blockchain-secured real-time transportation usage data results in helping municipal planners optimise routes and schedules, in turn, enhancing efficiency.

Of significance is that blockchain technology enables decentralised, transparent governance that improves citizen involvement and accountability. Furthermore, blockchain-based voting systems ensure secure, tamper-proof elections (whereby boosting democratic trust), and transparent blockchain public spending records allow citizens to monitor government spending, so decreasing corruption and enhancing accountability. Blockchains also allow stakeholders to securely share data and insights for urban planning decision-making together with decentralised governance models allowing residents to propose and vote on community ideas, making governance more inclusive and responsive. Smart cities create massive amounts of data, creating privacy and security concerns. Blockchain-based decentralised identity management solutions permit people to share personal data securely and selectively since the technology’s strong encryption methods keep sensitive data safe and accessible only to authorised parties. Hence, blockchains can secure interdepartmental data sharing for city governments which not only improves departmental coordination and decision-making but also decreases data breaches. Fundamental to this is that blockchains ensure smart cities may use data-driven insights without losing their citizens' trust because they are prioritising data privacy and security. Meanwhile, providing goods and services in urban settings requires efficient supply chain management and blockchain technology can track items from manufacture to delivery in real time, improving supply chain transparency. In turn, this traceability promotes operational efficiency and helps discover and resolve counterfeit items. Another example is waste management which can use blockchain technology to track pickup and recycling refuse - automatic garbage collection and disposal are ensured by smart contracts and the transparency of blockchains supports trash management provider accountability and sustainability.

**Real-world examples of blockchain integration:**

> · Several cities and organisations have successfully integrated blockchain-powered platforms into their smart city initiatives. [Dubai](https://techinformed.com/dubai-we-built-this-city-on-block-and-chain/), for example, has implemented blockchains across various public services, including property registration and healthcare. The city’s blockchain-based system for land registry reduces paperwork and ensures secure and transparent property transactions.
> 
> · [Estonia’s e-Residency program](https://www.xolo.io/zz-en/e-residency) is another notable example. By leveraging blockchain technology, the program offers secure digital identity services that enable efficient e-governance. Similarly, [Vienna](https://www.prnewswire.co.uk/news-releases/ey-and-city-of-vienna-collaborate-on-public-blockchain-networks-689720041.html) uses blockchain to enhance data sharing between city departments, ensuring transparency and efficiency.
> 
> · [Energy Web Foundation (EWF)](https://www.energyweb.org/) is pioneering decentralised energy markets using blockchain. Through its platform, residents can trade renewable energy directly, promoting green energy adoption and reducing carbon footprints.

Without doubt, integrating blockchains into smart cities offers numerous benefits. Enhanced efficiency is a key advantage, as automation through smart contracts eliminates manual processes and reduces bureaucratic delays - transparency fosters trust among stakeholders by ensuring that data and operations are verifiable. Cost savings are another significant benefit since, by streamlining processes and reducing reliance on intermediaries, blockchains can lowers operational costs for both public and private sectors.

However, scalability is a concern as current blockchain networks often struggle to handle the vast amounts of data and transactions generated by urban systems. Interoperability between blockchain platforms and existing systems also poses technical difficulties, requiring greater standardisation efforts. Regulatory uncertainty is another obstacle and the lack of clear policies and frameworks for blockchains’ use in smart cities creates hesitation among stakeholders. Unsurprisingly, implementing blockchain technology requires significant investment in infrastructure and expertise, which can be a barrier for cash-strapped municipalities and also public awareness and education are crucial for driving adoption - many citizens and businesses remain unfamiliar with blockchain’s capabilities and benefits, necessitating outreach and training programs to build confidence and trust.

But regardless of these challenges, the future of blockchains being deployed extensively in smart cities is promising with advancements in technology and growing awareness driving adoption. Integrating blockchain technology with internet of things and AI will create smarter, more responsive urban systems that can adapt to dynamic challenges. For instance, blockchain-enabled IoT devices can securely collect and analyse real-time data, enabling predictive maintenance, better traffic management and more efficient use of resources. Sustainability will remain a key focus, with blockchain playing a central role in achieving green goals; decentralised energy systems, waste reduction initiatives, and efficient transportation networks are just some of the ways blockchain will contribute to sustainability. Blockchain technology is undoubtedly set to play a transformative role in the development of smart cities. By addressing challenges related to data privacy, governance, energy management and transportation, blockchain enhances urban efficiency and sustainability. And whilst hurdles such as scalability and regulatory uncertainty remain, ongoing innovation and collaboration promise a future where blockchain is a cornerstone of urban systems. As cities worldwide embrace smart technologies, blockchain will undoubtedly be a key enabler of the urban landscapes of tomorrow. But, the challenge remains - will blockchain technology prove to be the foundation of a more democratic, efficient future, or will it be merely another fragmented experiment in digital governance?