---
title: "What will be the next world reserve currency?"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/what-will-be-the-next-world-reserve"
---

# What will be the next world reserve currency?

*By Jonny Fry | *

Exploring the future of reserve currencies inevitably involves reflecting on their historical evolution. The pound sterling, created in the 12th century under King Henry II and initially tied to a pound of silver, stands as the [world’s oldest active currency](https://www.monetarygold.com/global-reserve-fiat-currencies/#:~:text=Global%20reserve%20currencies%20have%20historically,seen%20on%20the%20currency%20chart.). Its dominance peaked during the British Empire's height in the 19th century, however, by the 1920s, the pound relinquished its role to the US dollar whereby ushering-in a new financial epoch. For over a century, the US dollar has played a commanding role in the global economy, underpinned by the US’s economic strength and military influence; it is central to the majority of commodity pricing, trade agreements and central bank reserves. Yet, whilst the dollar currently makes up about 60% of global reserves, this figure is gradually declining and could reduce to [40-45% by 2050](https://www.omfif.org/2024/10/how-gradual-decline-in-dollar-dominance-could-quicken/), hinting at a shift toward a more decentralised financial system with shared reserve currency responsibilities. The US dollar’s once unchallenged supremacy is now facing scepticism as economic diversification initiatives, rising geopolitical disputes and the expanding influence of emerging markets have prompted nations to explore alternatives. Furthermore, these searches signal a reconfiguration of global power where dependence on a single reserve currency is seen as a vulnerability. The declining dominance of the US dollar is driven by several key factors including trade imbalances, rising US debt and the Federal Reserve’s monetary policies, which have cast doubt on the US dollar’s stability over time. Additionally, sanctions and the strategic use of the dollar in international politics have prompted some nations to seek independence from dollar-based systems. However, no single currency has yet taken the lead as a viable successor, leaving multiple contenders and innovations competing for prominence.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!GGej!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fbd23eef9-2b3a-465d-b8f6-dccc53aa527a_876x664.png)

Source: Teamblockchain/[Monetary gold](https://www.monetarygold.com/global-reserve-fiat-currencies/#:~:text=Global%20reserve%20currencies%20have%20historically,seen%20on%20the%20currency%20chart.)

Contenders for the next reserve currency include:

> · **the euro - regional strength with global aspirations**

The euro ranks as the second most widely held reserve currency, positioning it as a major contender. Given the European Union’s substantial share of global trade, the euro’s impact stretches beyond the borders of its member states - its stability and liquidity offer a compelling case for central banks. However, the euro’s chances of becoming the primary global reserve currency are constrained by political and economic disunity within the Eurozone. Past financial crises, including the Greek debt crisis, have highlighted vulnerabilities so raising concerns about the euro’s trustworthiness as a reserve asset.

> · **the yuan - China’s rising economic clout**

China’s yuan, or renminbi, has steadily grown in global trade and financial markets. As the world’s second-largest economy, China has promoted the yuan through initiatives such as the Belt and Road Initiative and yuan-backed trade agreements. But, despite these efforts, concerns about capital controls, financial opacity and the country’s centralised governance system hinder the yuan’s attractiveness as a reserve currency. For the yuan to rival the dollar, substantial changes would be necessary within China’s financial sector.

> · **digital currencies - a paradigm shift**

The introduction of digital currencies brings a revolutionary change to the global monetary framework. Central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) are a digital counterpart to fiat money, offering enhanced efficiency and transparency in cross-border payments and a digital dollar, euro or yuan could promote financial inclusion, cut transaction costs and update payment systems. However, the path to CBDCs becoming global reserve assets faces obstacles such as interoperability challenges, privacy issues and the need for global adoption, but could we see a basket of CBDCs being used to as the world’s reserve currency with a weighting based on the % of GDP of a selection of countries?

In times of economic uncertainty, tangible assets such as gold and other commodities have long been considered safe havens. Gold’s intrinsic value and proven history as a store of wealth make it a reliable defence against inflation and some experts suggest that reviving the gold standard or including gold in reserve portfolios could restore balance to the global financial system. Alongside gold, commodities such as oil, rare earth metals and agricultural goods could help diversify reserve portfolios. In addition, tokenised commodities, which use blockchain technology to digitally represent physical assets, offer a modern solution for integrating tangible assets into the monetary system. By some at least, Bitcoin is touted to replace the US$ and offers an intriguing alternative to traditional currencies. With its decentralised and deflationary nature, Bitcoin operates independently of government control so providing financial autonomy, and its capped supply of 21 million coins (reflecting gold’s scarcity) has earned it the label, “digital gold”. Furthermore, Bitcoin recently [surpassed $100,000 for the first time](https://www.forbes.com/sites/digital-assets/2025/01/06/bitcoin-prices-surpass-100000-for-first-time-in-2025-as-trump-rally-fuels-gains/). Nevertheless, although its volatile price and regulatory uncertainties remain significant barriers to its acceptance as a global reserve currency, Bitcoin’s prominence as a reserve asset continues to grow, especially in regions grappling with economic instability and inflationary pressures. Countries which have been prone to high inflation in their economies, such as Argentina, Turkey and [Brazil, have proposed adding Bitcoin to their national treasuries](https://btctimes.com/brazilian-lawmakers-propose-sovereign-bitcoin-reserve/) and have turned to Bitcoin as a potential store of value to combat currency devaluation. [El Salvador’s groundbreaking move in 2021 to adopt Bitcoin as legal tender](https://www.nber.org/digest/202207/el-salvadors-experiment-bitcoin-legal-tender) not only highlighted its potential to foster financial inclusion but also attracted foreign investments, bolstering the nation’s tourism sector. Similarly, lawmakers in [Hong Kong](https://dw-media.tkww.hk/epaper/wwp/20241230/a10-1230.pdf) have proposed incorporating Bitcoin into the city’s financial reserves, a sentiment echoed in [Poland](https://notesfrompoland.com/2024/11/19/presidential-candidate-pledges-to-create-strategic-bitcoin-reserve-in-poland/) where leaders have suggested integrating Bitcoin as part of national reserves. Switzerland, known for its financial innovation, has taken a decisive step with its “Bitcoin Initiative” - its [chancellery’s approval of a proposal to include Bitcoin](https://cryptoslate.com/swiss-chancellery-approves-proposal-to-include-bitcoin-in-national-reserves/) in the national reserves alongside gold further underscores the country's forward-thinking approach. If passed, this measure would make Switzerland the first nation to constitutionally embed cryptocurrency into its monetary policy, potentially setting a global precedent. However, proponents argue that Bitcoin’s decentralised and deflationary nature aligns with Switzerland’s goals of financial sovereignty and resilience, whilst critics warn of the risks posed by its notorious price volatility. Globally, other nations are rethinking reserve strategies - the [Abu Dhabi](https://www.agbi.com/banking-finance/2025/02/mubadala-blackrock-bitcoin-etf-ishares/) sovereign wealth fund has reported to have bought 8.2 million shares in the BlackRock Bitcoin ETC; [Russia](https://www.cnbc.com/2024/07/30/russia-considers-legalizing-crypto-as-a-form-of-payment-amid-sanctions.html) has explored using cryptocurrencies to reduce reliance on the US dollar and circumvent sanctions; and [Germany](https://www.benzinga.com/markets/eurozone/24/12/42724073/european-central-bank-should-consider-bitcoin-reserve-former-german-finance-minister-says) has seen calls from prominent political figures advocating for the European Central Bank and the Bundesbank to adopt Bitcoin reserves.

The institutional embrace of Bitcoin certainly underscores its credibility as an established asset class; with [quoted-companies](https://www.bitcoinmagazinepro.com/charts/bitcoin-treasury-public-listed-companies/) such as MicroStrategy, Tesla, Coinbase and Galaxy Digital collectively amassing [over $95 billion in Bitcoin](https://etfdb.com/themes/physical-bitcoin-etfs/), the growing prevalence of Bitcoin Exchange-Traded Funds (ETFs) has further accelerated its adoption. The five leading ETFs hold significant reserves and, as Bitcoin becomes more widely adopted, its notorious volatility is likely to stabilise therefore making it increasingly attractive for reserve management. Furthermore, the incorporation of Bitcoin into sovereign strategies marks a paradigm shift in global finance and, whether through Switzerland’s pioneering “Bitcoin Initiative,” El Salvador’s continued efforts or the broader adoption across Latin America and Europe, Bitcoin is steadily reshaping reserve policies. As the cryptocurrency matures and institutional participation increases, its role as a reserve asset may redefine the intersection of traditional finance and blockchain technology, setting the stage for a new era in global monetary policy. Yet, whilst Bitcoin offers remarkable potential, it also faces critical challenges. Issues such as regulatory uncertainty, environmental impacts of mining and technical constraints must be resolved to enable broader acceptance. Its decentralised model further complicates questions of governance and global accountability; certain countries, such as Japan, highlight the hurdles in integrating it into national reserves. Japan, under Prime Minister Ishiba Shigeru, [has emphasised stability and liquidity, opting for a cautious approach to reserve management](https://www.ccn.com/news/crypto/japan-bitcoin-reserves-declines-security-concerns/). But, despite these concerns, Bitcoin’s advantages are notable. Its deflationary mechanism provides a shield against inflation and its borderless functionality supports seamless international transactions. In regions with limited financial access, Bitcoin represents an opportunity to engage in the global economy. Switzerland’s consideration of Bitcoin for its national reserves highlights its increasing recognition as a valuable asset.

The future of the global reserve currency might not rest on a single replacement for the US dollar. Instead, a multipolar system comprising various reserve assets could take shape. Such a system would reflect the interconnectedness and technological sophistication of today’s world where economic strength is distributed and innovation thrives. And tokenised assets are likely to be a cornerstone of this new paradigm. [Mastercard’s Multi-Token Network](https://newsroom.mastercard.com/news/latin-america/en/newsroom/press-releases/pr-en/2023/june/mastercard-announces-multi-token-network-mtn-to-scale-and-secure-blockchain-technology/) launched in June 2023 and [Visa’s Tokenised Asset Platform](https://investor.visa.com/news/news-details/2024/Visa-Introduces-the-Visa-Tokenized-Asset-Platform/default.aspx) launched in October 2024 are ground-breaking efforts to bridge the gap between digital assets and mainstream finance. Through seamless tokenised exchanges of currencies, commodities and securities, these platforms could redefine what a reserve currency means.

The path away from US dollar dominance will be neither swift nor simple, driven by economic transformation, geopolitical forces and technological innovation. And, despite its current centrality, the US dollar’s role is gradually being complemented by the euro, yuan, Bitcoin and other emerging assets. By 2050, the world is likely to have more fully embraced a decentralised financial system where various currencies and assets coexist, promoting adaptability and resilience. This shift is set to redefine monetary sovereignty and unlock opportunities for innovation, inclusiveness and enhanced stability.