---
title: "Decentralised science (DeSci): empowering research using blockchain technology"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/decentralised-science-desci-empowering"
---

# Decentralised science (DeSci): empowering research using blockchain technology

*By Jonny Fry | *

For decades, a few gatekeepers including government organisations, charities and universities have pushed science forward. These groups have helped make numerous breakthroughs but their rules can also get in the way of new discoveries. The bureaucracy of big companies can slow down the process of getting money and applying for it, and politics can steer research toward restricted aims and away from topics that are less politically acceptable. In addition, less conventional sources may have a hard time getting funding for new ideas since funding restrictions tend to favour established researchers and organisations.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!orGb!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F2f1fa091-1579-4ce9-abb5-dafc929fb6ed_1138x638.png)

Source: [bnbchain](https://www.bnbchain.org/en/blog/what-is-decentralized-science-desci)

Although the conservatism of current systems can make it hard for new research paradigms to grow, a significant change is occurring because of blockchain technology. [Decentralised science (DeSci)](https://onchain.org/magazine/what-is-decentralized-science-desci/) is a new trend that could make it easier for everyone to become involved in scientific research, to fund it, implement it, evaluate it and share it. The main concept is community-driven finance which is made possible by tokenised digital assets that do not need middlemen. This new approach allows academics and a global community of fans and stakeholders to work together to build knowledge, whereby making the scientific world a more open and livelier place. However, the administrative costs of the traditional scientific funding paradigm can impede science. Researchers could be so inundated with funding applications that time and money is wasted. When money is scarce, researchers may have concentrate on initiatives that fit funding goals rather than new, riskier ones; and even whilst review committees do their best, non-scientific influences may nonetheless affect funding choices, i.e. for strategic and reputational reasons, some research subjects may be more important to institutions than others and large amounts of government money may be geopolitical. This can all make it challenging for fresh or unusual research ideas (particularly those outside established circles) to acquire funding and support. Furthermore, peer review is fundamental for science, although it carries its own problems. A reviewer's research interests, connections to institutions or scientific affiliations may affect the process, potentially making it unintentionally harder to come up with new ideas.

Source: [BitMonk](https://x.com/circularweb3/status/1941844583425695753)

DeSci itself uses blockchain's openness, security and decentralisation to offer a compelling and potentially disruptive alternative. Imagine a world where academics may immediately submit their well-constructed project ideas to a global community of scientists, investors, patients and information seekers, independent of institution or location. In this decentralised ecosystem, open and auditable on-chain methods allow a varied collection of stakeholders to decide which research projects are most promising and worthy of funding. Smart tokenised governance protocols can transfer decision-making authority to stakeholders, allowing them to decide the future of scientific investigation. Utilising blockchain technology is it possible to create digital assets to help fund DeSci. Digital tokens can be issued to represent a fractionalised ownership stake in a research project, valuable intellectual property from scientific research or a tangible share in the potential future revenue streams from a groundbreaking scientific discovery. By buying these tokens, individuals, corporations and even [decentralised autonomous organisations (DAOs)](https://www.investopedia.com/tech/what-dao/) may directly fund their favourite research projects, becoming active stakeholders in scientific progress. Moreover, direct community investment encourages public participation in scientific financing, shifting away from a top-down structure to a dynamic and responsive ecosystem - token fractionalisation allows more donors, from hobbyists to huge investment funds, to support scientific research. Certainly, the adoption of DeSci funding offers a multitude of significant advantages that address the inherent limitations of traditional models, including:

> · **unlocking a vastly expanded funding pool** -**** DeSci is ultra-revolutionary because it can reach a far broader and more diverse range of investors. Researchers may now obtain money from a global group of individuals who are interested in their field of research, without being required to go via government grants or charity endowments. This financial democratisation might unleash a significant amount of money from people, disease-specific advocacy organisations, scientific DAOs and blockchain-based crowdfunding projects.
> 
> · **introducing powerful new incentive mechanisms** \- tokenisation gives researchers and funders new and interesting reasons to work together. Researchers can obtain tokens for completing certain goals, submitting peer-reviewed results or adding to open-source scientific material. Progress and reward are intimately connected which makes people more responsible and efficient. If promising research leads to breakthroughs or commercial usage, the tokens of those funders who invest money into it may go up in value. This natural convergence of interests leads to a scientific innovation environment that is healthy and can support itself, where researchers thrive and early backers gain.
> 
> · **enhancing transparency and unwavering accountability** \- blockchain's transparency and unchangeability fix many problems associated with accountability in traditional finance structures. A public ledger that cannot be changed can keep track of every financing transaction, research milestone and crucial update. This makes it clear, easy to check and easy to follow money transfers and also how it is being utilised along the study process. People and scientists are more likely to trust research funding and management more when they are open and honest.

Therefore, when you combine DeSci money with other new Web3 technologies, it becomes more powerful. Blockchain-based decentralised platforms may quickly build research communities that are active and work together. Scientists from different fields and countries may talk to each other, safely share research data, do peer reviews that are more open and efficient and build on each other's discoveries using these platforms. NFTs, which let you prove that you possess a unique digital item, may also be used to show other scientific qualities. This may mean owning research datasets, obtaining access to specialist scientific tools or having digital rights to peer-reviewed articles. This tokenisation of scientific assets gives academics new ways to make money and encourages scientists to share vital resources with one other. Meanwhile, real-world uses of DeSci financing are showing the future of scientific research - [VitaDAO](https://www.vitadao.com/), a decentralised autonomous organisation, sponsors early-stage longevity research and the DAO's native token holders vote on research projects to finance, exhibiting community-driven decision-making. In addition, [AxonDAO](https://axondao.io/): “ _builds, supports and funds decentralized science projects with biometric AI”,_ and [Molecule](https://www.molecule.to/about-us) matches researchers with financing for intellectual property NFTs - another intriguing example. This allows academics to procure financing whilst keeping tokenised ownership of their discoveries, which might lead to new commercialisation and adoption models for scientific achievements. Numerous smaller efforts across scientific fields are also using tokens and DAOs to fund research programs, establish open-access scientific journals and motivate citizen scientists to gather and analyse data. Without doubt, these early examples demonstrate the DeSci model's flexibility to many scientific fields.

However, regardless of this is that, although DeSci financing has great potential, the ecosystem is still developing and several key issues must be solved to enable its long-term success and widespread acceptance. Tokenised asset regulations, especially for scientific research and intellectual property, are still developing. DeSci projects need clear and consistent policies to build confidence and participation and ensuring the quality, rigor and ethics of decentralised research funding is also important. This strategy requires robust peer-review processes and clear assessment criteria, maybe tailored to DeSci platforms, to ensure the integrity and legitimacy of scientific findings. Data ownership, privacy and intellectual property utilisation in a decentralised system will require careful thought and suitable governance structures. But, despite these problems, DeSci funding may change scientific research - and it is ever evolving. By breaking down traditional gatekeepers, allowing communities to take part in the funding process and creating new and mutually beneficial incentive systems, blockchain and Web3 technologies are making the future of scientific discovery more decentralised, open, efficient and impactful. As these technologies develop and the DeSci ecosystem grows and improves its models, revolutionary and new research will thrive, thanks to the expertise, enthusiasm and funding from a worldwide community that wants to help people learn more. And the result? This extreme decentralisation might lead to a time of unprecedented growth and progress in science that will help humanity in the future.