---
title: "How blockchains, Web3 and programmable digital assets can build a resilient financial market"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/how-blockchains-web3-and-programmable"
---

# How blockchains, Web3 and programmable digital assets can build a resilient financial market

*By Jonny Fry | *

In a world where things are becoming more and more unpredictable, resilience is no longer enough. In order for confidence to be maintained in financial markets, they have to be designed to function in good as well as stressful times. Unfortunately, financial markets’ stability has been questioned when faced with [black swan occurrences](https://bookmap.com/blog/the-biggest-black-swan-events-in-financial-history-lessons-for-traders) (e.g. the stock market crashes in 1929, 1987, 2008 and COVID-19) which are unexpected, high-impact disasters that throw markets, institutions and whole economies off balance. These shocks reveal how unstable our current financial systems are at their heart. So, what if financial systems could not only handle stress, but also become stronger as a result of it? And what if we could go beyond being resilient to being ‘antifragile’? [Nassim Nicholas Taleb](https://tepsa.eu/analysis/antifragile-things-that-gain-from-disorder-by-nassim-nicholas-taleb/) made the term antifragile popular to describe systems that become stronger when they are stressed/shocked or from other factors that make them weak; this includes blockchain technology, Web3 paradigms and programmable digital assets. These new concepts are not simply fleeting trends in technology; they make us think profoundly about how banks are set up, how they develop over time and how they work. Hence, by decentralising control, integrating trust into code and allowing new methods co-ordinate the economy, they may turn our weak hierarchies into strong networks. Indeed, in a recent address, [the World Economic Forum founder, Klaus Schwab](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cDybeNbFJXE), predicts that black swan events ( these unexpected events with extreme, paradigm shifting consequences) are on the horizon.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!ELQ9!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F8aa4878c-41d7-401e-9e27-0426af4a55a5_684x586.png)

Source: [World Government Summit](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cDybeNbFJXE)

**Understanding antifragility in finance**

To appreciate how blockchain and Web3 can contribute to antifragility, it is essential to first define the term in contrast with robustness and resilience - a robust system resists shocks and remains unchanged, a resilient system absorbs shocks and recovers. However, an antifragile system improves when subjected to stress. In finance, antifragility would mean that systems learn from crises, reconfigure themselves automatically and redistribute risk in ways that strengthen the whole network over time. Such systems must possess:

> · **redundancy** \- distributed structures that reduce single points of failure
> 
> · **optionality** \- flexibility to respond in multiple ways to changing conditions
> 
> · **transparency** \- real-time information flows that allow actors to adapt rapidly
> 
> · **self-correction** \- mechanisms that internalise feedback and adjust behaviour accordingly  
>   
> 

Traditional financial systems replete with centralised decision-making, opaque instruments - rigid regulations lack these properties. Nonetheless, blockchain and Web3 technologies offer a fresh foundation to build them in. Being a decentralised network that allows you to record data in a safe, open and unchangeable way, blockchain technology is important for constructing antifragile systems since it renders it possible to eliminate the requirement for centralised trust. In conventional finance, central banks, clearinghouses and regulatory agencies are the people who keep trust - if they fail or are manipulated, it can lead to systemic catastrophes. Blockchain replaces confidence in institutions with cryptographic security and a shared agreement which makes it much less likely that one thing will fail. Meanwhile, when black swan events happen, centralised systems often stop working or break down because of fear, regulatory problems or a shortage of cash. On the other hand, blockchain networks function all the time (no matter what time zone, jurisdiction or crisis) and potentially using programmable pools of digital money could access capital when required. The fact that blockchains are transparent means that assets, debts and the health of the system can be seen in real time. Hence, this transparency and access to real time data enables smarter and faster decisions therefore enabling central banks and regulators to respond quickly to shocks rather than waiting for official reports or audits - after the harm is done.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!BNH2!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fb974c6ec-ee53-450a-bfe9-32789391c376_730x890.png)

Source: [X](https://x.com/Funmilola_baby/status/1948025661882265690)

Furthermore, a key feature of Web3 is the smart contract-governed decentralised autonomous organisation (DAO). Token holders vote democratically and DAOs can adapt swiftly - unlike centralised financial organisations. In a black swan, a DAO can modify its rules and shift money or strategies with community consent, without top-down directives. And the ability to adapt is key to antifragility since, in a crisis, conventional banks often freeze or argue politically. However, DAOs may program contingency plans, circuit breakers and adaptive governance and Web3 allows programmatic participation. People can possess “governance tokens” which let them vote on decisions and ensure equal incentives. Certainly, in times of stress, distributed intelligence can assist the system adapt faster and better than a central entity. Typically, Web1 and Web2 were constructed in a centralised manner requiring human interaction as opposed to being programmable and automated - Web3 is decentralised and autonomous therefore enabling peer-to-peer transactions.

**Programmable digital assets: finance with built-in intelligence**

Programmable digital assets powered by smart contracts can enforce rules, trigger events and manage risk autonomously and are the final pillar of antifragile finance. Programmable assets can autonomously adapt to situations, unlike traditional assets that require external execution and monitoring. Furthermore, stablecoins use algorithmic supply changes or collateral-backed techniques to stabilise prices - market instability might trigger automated rebalancing, liquidation or redemption methods to preserve value parity. Other programmable assets include insurance contracts, synthetic derivatives and yield-generating tokens - hedging, staking and yield farming may be encoded in a single token whereby decreasing operational risk and boosting optionality. Flash loans allow consumers to borrow money without collateral if they repay it within a specified period of time. So, although they may appear hazardous, but blockchain transactions are executed in almost real time, either they succeed or fail. These advances enable arbitrage, liquidity and dynamic risk management that traditional finance cannot. A modular, quickly growing ecosystem is enabled by composability with the ability to put digital assets and protocols together akin to LEGO bricks. The ability to experiment, fail rapidly and reconfigure defines antifragile systems, although caution clearly needs to be exercised when relying on technology too much - eloquently highlighted by Jonathan Hall, deputy governor at the Bank of England, in his speech - “[Beware of Monsters in the Deep](https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2024/may/jon-hall-speech-at-the-university-of-exeter)”.

Some recent examples where blockchain-based systems exhibited antifragile characteristics in response to black swan-like scenarios include:

> · **2020 DeFi stress test** \- in March 2020, during the initial COVID-19 panic, global markets crashed and liquidity evaporated. The DeFi ecosystem, although immature, was put to the test. [MakerDAO](https://makerdao.com/en/), the protocol behind the DAI stablecoin, experienced a sudden drop in collateral value and a rush of liquidations. But although the system suffered, it did not collapse. The community rapidly proposed and passed governance votes to adjust parameters, restore the peg and strengthen risk models. Far from disappearing, the DeFi space grew exponentially in the following months.
> 
> · **FTX collapse vs on-chain proof-of-reserves** \- the 2022 collapse of [FTX](https://www.investopedia.com/what-went-wrong-with-ftx-6828447), a major centralised exchange, shook the crypto industry. Billions were lost due to opaque operations and mismanagement. In response, decentralised exchanges (DEXs) and on-chain proof-of-reserves mechanisms gained traction. Automatic market makers such Uniswap, which execute trades via smart contracts with full transparency, saw increased adoption. The incident highlighted the inherent fragility of centralised actors and the relative resilience of on-chain protocols.
> 
> · **Ukraine War and crypto fundraising** \- during the early days of the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022, blockchain technology played a surprising role in humanitarian relief. The Ukrainian government raised over [$100 million](https://www.coindesk.com/business/2022/03/09/ukraine-has-received-close-to-100-million-in-crypto-donations) in crypto donations within days, bypassing bureaucratic red tape and international banking restrictions. Smart contracts ensured transparent, auditable fund usage and decentralised contributors from around the world were able to participate. This demonstrated the utility of decentralised finance in crisis scenarios.

Essentially, building antifragile financial systems is not merely about adopting new technologies - it requires a design shift in how we think about money, trust and governance. First, embrace failure as fuel - antifragile systems are not built to avoid failure, they are built to learn from it. Web3 ecosystems such as Ethereum undergo frequent “hard forks” and community debates that lead to improvement. Unlike legacy institutions that suppress change, these systems treat disruption as an opportunity for evolution. Second, design for decentralisation, not only distribution. It is not sufficient to spread data or processes across nodes. True antifragility comes from distributing authority, incentives and decision-making - this ensures that the failure of any single actor does not endanger the whole system. Third, build for composability - financial systems must move away from siloed services toward interoperable, modular infrastructures and this enables rapid experimentation, iteration and adaptation in response to emerging challenges. Fourth, embed transparency and accountability into code - programmable assets and smart contracts should not merely replicate traditional finance but improve upon it by making every rule and risk visible and verifiable in real-time. Finally, prepare for the unknown since black swan events, by definition, cannot be predicted. Antifragile systems can be designed to expect the unexpected - not with rigid contingency plans but with adaptive mechanisms and open networks that can self-organise when the time comes.

The journey toward antifragile finance is still in its infancy. Blockchain networks face scalability issues, energy concerns and regulatory uncertainty; Web3 governance models are often inefficient or vulnerable to plutocracy; and programmable assets can behave unpredictably in edge cases, leading to exploits or instability. But the direction is clear. The traditional financial system, with its monolithic institutions and systemic fragilities, is not equipped to survive the shocks of the 21st century. The future belongs to systems that can evolve under pressure, that treat volatility as information and that empower participants rather than constrain them. Blockchain technology, Web3 and programmable digital assets offer more than decentralisation - they offer a path to financial architectures that do not merely survive crises but grow stronger because of them.

Resilience was yesterday’s imperative - antifragility is tomorrow’s advantage.