---
title: "The curious case of Pi Network: what 35 million users are still waiting for"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/the-curious-case-of-pi-network-what"
---

# The curious case of Pi Network: what 35 million users are still waiting for

*By Jonny Fry | *

Pi Network launched during a pivotal moment in crypto history - Bitcoin had just broken into mainstream consciousness, sparking a global rush to discover the next big thing, whilst Ethereum was gaining momentum as a programmable blockchain platform. Pi stood out by offering a radically different model: mobile-first mining without the energy-intensive requirements of Bitcoin. But what truly set it apart and intrigued early adopters was its unique value proposition: you could mine Pi, but not withdraw it. Resultant of which was that this design choice created a built-in sense of scarcity and long-term belief, encouraging ‘Pioneers’ (Pi users) to hold on in anticipation of future utility. Few, however, could have anticipated that this would mark the beginning of a five-year (and counting) journey, one defined as much by patience and speculation as by innovation and community building.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!Ty0l!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F2e93795d-dfae-4381-b554-bbd895af6f4f_994x1004.png)

Source: [X](https://x.com/search?q=pi%20network%20a%20buy%20or%20a%20sell&src=typed_query&f=top)/PI Network

On what is now marked annually as Pi Day (March 14th, 2019), Pi Network quietly launched, founded by Stanford graduates, Dr. Nicolas Kokkalis and Dr. Chengdiao Fan. Not long after, phase one rolled out: mining Pi via a mobile app. No blockchain yet, just a placeholder ledger and a promise. But in a period where mining usually meant warehouse-scale rigs and rising electricity bills, Pi’s approach felt offbeat - tap your phone once a day, build a network and watch your balance grow. It ran on the Stellar Consensus Protocol, not proof of work, so it was light. No heat, no noise, no drain. You joined with an invite code, tapped a lightning bolt every 24 hours and earned more by getting others to do the same. Mining became social. One account per person, a soft nod toward integrity but also a way to keep the model from breaking under its own weight. It was not clear what Pi was yet, but it did not feel like what had preceded it - and that was sufficient to ‘get people through the door’. At the time, holding on to crypto was gospel. You did not merely invest you “HODLed” __ i.e. buy and hold indefinitely. Pi leaned into that logic; its value was not liquid, was not even yet real, but that only made it feel _early_. That is where the hope lived - users were mining a future. You were getting in before the world caught up. And maybe, just maybe, one day you would be rewarded for your foresight. Nonetheless, nothing could have prepared pioneers for the five-year voyage they are now on. Meantime, not much occurred in Pi’s timeline as phase one pressed on until 2021 when phase two got under way with the launch of its Testnet and community-run Nodes, marking its first steps toward decentralisation. This phase introduced the Pi Browser and SDK to support DApp development, and the first Pi Hackathon encouraged builders to create real-world use cases so setting the stage for a functional crypto ecosystem. By the time Pi’s main net finally opened for external trading in early 2025, it felt less like a breakthrough and more akin to another hoop to jump through. The rollout was messy - many users found themselves stumped, unable to migrate their balances because of KYC issues. After years of mining and waiting, the question was not simply “when” anymore - it was “will this ever actually work?”

Implausibly, the Pi Network has been able to build a massive following without being fully launched on major exchanges, and OKX is the most mainstream exchange Pi currently trades on; efforts to move to other exchanges come with their problems. A community [opinion poll](https://x.com/PiListingNews/status/1929155863727472944) has found that most [Pioneers opposed listing Pi on Binance](https://www.cryptotimes.io/2025/06/04/pi-network-binance-listing-talks-spark-outrage-pioneers-say-no/), pointing to ongoing technical and governance issues. Chief among these were stalled KYC processes - some delayed for over four months due to bugs, inactive security circles and low Validator Program participation. Users reported lost tokens, wallet glitches and an inflexible March 14 migration deadline that caused irreversible forfeitures. And whilst the market capitalisation of the Pi Network soared to [over $13.5 billion](https://www.coingecko.com/en/coins/pi-network) in early March 2025, this valuation has since imploded - falling to $3billion by early July 2025. Some accused the core team of deliberately slowing KYC to keep tokens locked, whilst moderators were said to be muting criticism. In addition, the core team is alleged to have been planning to use [AI to replace validators](https://www.coinspeaker.com/pi-network-validators-risk-getting-replaced-by-ai-pi-coin-price/). However, these validators have been unpaid and feel cheated - not merely for the validators’ sake.

Furthermore, Pi’s [$100 M fund for utility](https://minepi.com/blog/pi-ventures) seems to be aimed outward, favouring start-ups over the very community that sustained the project whereby highlighting a deeper tension. Questions arise as to whether users are projecting their hopes onto Pi, resisting its evolution beyond their early participation, or the core team is intentionally hoarding control over nodes, token supply and governance to preserve its grip on the ecosystem so raising suspicions of bad faith - perhaps both sides are caught in mutual paranoia. One modest reassurance has been the rollout of Boostr, a Pi native app that allows users in parts of Africa, Asia and Latin America to pay for electricity, airtime and data using Pi. But even this feels like a carefully controlled gesture, meant to show progress whilst keeping real utility on a short leash. It is possible the core team is less interested in empowering the community than in managing them, hence tightening access to prevent a mass selloff, fearing that if Pi becomes tradable too soon, they will be the ones ‘dumped on’. The Pi price [crumbled after the announcement of the fund](https://news.bitcoin.com/hype-backfires-pi-network-token-price-crumbles-after-key-announcement/) so it does not help that users are alleging that the team [transferred 12 million Pi](https://www.binance.com/en/square/post/24390192876369) amidst the price crash - unsurprisinlgy, the [team denied it](https://www.binance.com/en/square/post/24707219150217). With millions of users mining PI tokens through a mobile app, the project promised an easier path to crypto adoption - but the path thus far has proven to be anything but easy. Pi seems to no longer be about timelines or tokenomics, but about whether belief (once stretched too thin) ever truly rebounds. Maybe that is the real experiment Pi has been running all along - less about consensus protocols and app ecosystems, more about how long people will wait when they have already waited this long, and about how far collective hope can go before it becomes inertia. Pi did not simply ask people to believe, it asked them to build value through belief alone. And now, with the token live, the tech semi-operational and the community fraying at the edges, the question is not whether Pi will succeed, but whether the version of Pi people believed in ever existed at all.

The Pi Network was supposed to be crypto’s great equaliser - mining digital currency from your phone with zero cost, zero expertise and the promise of future riches. Certainly, this appears too good to be true - and to date, that is what it would appear to be. [35+ million users](https://www.bitget.com/wiki/how-many-pi-coin-users-are-there), years of hype……and still no open main net and no liquidity - no way to ‘cash out’. So, is it a masterclass in building a massive user-base on marketing alone to then leave everyone stranded in an “enclosed network” with nothing to show for their clicks? And, the real takeaway? Crypto is not merely about community, it is about delivery. Users do not care how many million people you have onboarded if there is no utility, no transparency and no exit ramp. But if Pi proves anything, it is this: in crypto, trust is not built with buzzwords, it is earned with real-world use cases. Otherwise, you are simply another app, burning ‘phone batteries and users’ time - for nothing.