---
title: "The expanding landscape of cross-border payments (Part 1)"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/the-expanding-landscape-of-cross"
---

# The expanding landscape of cross-border payments (Part 1)

*By Jonny Fry | *

In this current global economy, cross-border payments have become a cornerstone of international trade and commerce. Yet, the term itself is shrouded in complexity, with over forty synonyms and antonyms listed on [Power Thesaurus](https://www.powerthesaurus.org/cross-border_payments) reflecting the multifaceted nature of these transactions. Cross-border payments are financial transactions that take place between parties in different countries. These payments are vital for global commerce, enabling businesses to send and receive funds across borders. With the rise of digital solutions and the increasing interconnectedness of the world economy, cross-border payments are becoming an increasingly significant component of global trade. According to projections from EDC, the total volume of cross-border B2B payments is [expected to hit USD 43 trillion by 2025](https://thepaypers.com/voice-of-the-industry/macroeconomic-factors-fuelling-b2b-cross-border-payments--1272897?utm_source=newsletter&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=Daily+2025-03-27+Daily-Newsletter-Payments). By 2030, this figure is expected to increase significantly, reaching USD 56 trillion. This impressive growth is largely driven by the ongoing expansion of global trade networks and the rapid adoption of digital solutions in the financial sector. As businesses move more operations online, the demand for seamless, cost-effective cross-border payment systems is expected to continue rising. Additionally, the growing rise of B2B ecommerce is contributing to this rapid increase. In fact, a recent study by Capital One Shopping forecasts that the global B2B ecommerce market will surge [from USD 30.4 trillion in 2024 to USD 66.9 trillion by 2029](https://capitaloneshopping.com/research/b2b-ecommerce-statistics), reflecting a staggering CAGR of 17.1%. This exponential growth in B2B ecommerce is further accelerating the need for efficient cross-border payment solutions.

**The scale and growth of cross-border payments**

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!eFEB!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F5b8391df-23a0-4c3c-bc25-49e4eada1d87_1364x762.png)

Source:**** TeamBlockchain ([ThePaypers](https://thepaypers.com/voice-of-the-industry/macroeconomic-factors-fuelling-b2b-cross-border-payments--1272897?utm_source=newsletter&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=Daily+2025-03-27+Daily-Newsletter-Payments))

[Payment processor vendors](https://dashdevs.com/blog/best-payment-processing-companies/#:~:text=The%20top%20ten%20payment%20processors,diverse%20payment%20processing%20software%20solutions) play a crucial role in facilitating secure and efficient transactions between buyers and sellers. These companies handle various forms of electronic payments, including credit card, debit card, e-wallet and online banking transactions, ensuring the smooth flow of funds across different payment methods. The global digital payments market is projected to reach $7.5 trillion by 2026, so highlighting the importance of choosing the right payment processor for businesses operating in this space. Key factors with these payment processors is that they provide businesses with the tools to expand payment options, enhance security and scale operations globally. Among the leading payment processors is Stripe, known for its developer-friendly platform and international capabilities. Founded in 2010, [Stripe](https://uptivity.co.uk/stripe-vs-paypal-which-payment-provider-is-better-for-small-businesses/) supports over 135 currencies, with online transactions costing 2.9% + $0.30. It is a popular choice for businesses looking for a versatile solution to manage payments globally. [PayPal Payments Pro](https://uptivity.co.uk/stripe-vs-paypal-which-payment-provider-is-better-for-small-businesses/), established in 1998, is another widely recognised option. It allows businesses to accept payments directly on their websites, with fees starting at 2.59% + $0.49 for online transactions. PayPal is known for its strong security measures and widespread acceptance, making it a trusted choice for e-commerce businesses. For those targeting Amazon shoppers, Amazon Payments offers a convenient way to use Amazon accounts for third-party transactions, charging [2.9% + $0.30 for in-person payments](https://pay.amazon.com/help/201212280). Shopify Payments, integrated within the Shopify platform, simplifies payment management for e-commerce businesses, with transaction fees starting at [2.4% + $0.30](https://www.shopify.com/uk/retail/credit-card-processing-fees). Finally, [Payoneer](https://tipalti.com/resources/learn/payoneer-vs-square/), specialising in cross-border payments, supports global operations with flexible payment options and fees starting at 3% + $0.30 for online transactions.

Stablecoins have rapidly evolved in 2024, moving beyond their early reputation as speculative assets to become key enablers of efficiency in cross-border payments, B2B transactions and real-time treasury management. In 2024, stablecoin transfer volumes [reached $27.6 trillion](https://www.moderntreasury.com/journal/stablecoins-in-action-b2b-and-b2c-payments#:~:text=In%202024%2C%20stablecoin%20transfer%20volumes,stablecoins%20for%20substantial%20financial%20transactions.), surpassing the combined transaction volumes of Visa and Mastercard by 7.7%. and underscoring the increasing reliance on stablecoins for substantial financial transactions. Pegged to fiat currencies to reduce volatility, stablecoins now play a practical role in global finance, offering near-instant, low-cost settlement for international payments. [This shift is driven by increasing interest from major institutions](https://www.pymnts.com/cryptocurrency/2024/stablecoins-biggest-2024-moves-from-cross-border-b2b-to-real-time-treasury/) such as Visa, Societe Generale, JP Morgan and Revolut, which are all exploring or already issuing stablecoins to meet growing demand. Indeed, it was revealed recently that [Walmart and Amazon](https://x.com/APompliano/status/1933497889013076228) are actively exploring the launch of their own separate US dollar-backed stablecoins. So, when the world’s largest retailers consider issuing their own digital dollars, they are not simply innovating payments, they are challenging the role of traditional banks and even central banks. A Walmart Coin or Amazon Dollar could allow these global titans to create closed-loop economies for suppliers, shoppers and partners whereby offering instant refunds, loyalty rewards and credit, natively on-chain and internalising payment infrastructure so reducing their reliance on Visa, Mastercard, or SWIFT. After all, stablecoins allow money to be programmable and payments to be automated, e.g:

> · discounts or coupons that expire in real time
> 
> · conditional payments to suppliers based on inventory turnover
> 
> · microcredit lines issued to shoppers at checkout
> 
> · cross border payments to be made to overseas suppliers

But, this is not simply about efficiency - it is about programmable consumer behaviour embedded directly into financial flows. If these stablecoins are pegged to the US dollar (as is likely), then Amazon and Walmart could export a private version of the $ globally; for customers in emerging markets, this may become a more trusted and usable medium of exchange than local fiat or even traditional bank accounts. It mirrors what Meta’s failed [Libra/Diem](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-60156682) project tried to do, only now in the US there could be government encouragement from Trump to allow this to happen. Why? Well, the more US$ backed stablecoins there are, the more demand there is for US treasury stocks - meaning, that the demand will hopefully reduce interest rates whereby making it cheaper for the US government to borrow more and re-finance the [$25trillion of debt in the next four years](https://tavexbullion.co.uk/the-us-must-refinance-28-trillion-in-debt-in-four-years/).

Meanwhile, real-world applications are expanding, with platforms such as Wirex and Regal cinemas accepting stablecoins and projects such as Mastercard’s Multi-Token Network and JP Morgan’s Kinexys streamlining B2B flows. Stablecoins offer treasury teams real-time visibility and liquidity therefore addressing long-standing pain points in managing global cash positions. Their ability to disintermediate legacy payment networks brings transparency and speed, supporting the broader digital transformation of finance. And, despite the need for clearer regulation, stablecoins have proven their utility in real-world financial processes, positioning them as foundational components of the next phase of financial infrastructure. [Coinbase recently stated](https://www.coinbase.com/en-gb/blog/powering-the-future-of-ecommerce-introducing-coinbase-payments): “ _Stablecoins are reshaping global commerce, and Coinbase is leading the charge with a major move into payments. Stablecoins processed $30 trillion in settlements last year–3x growth year-over-year_.” Nonetheless, if the US supports stablecoin proliferation as a **geopolitical tool** to boost dollar demand and hold down Treasury yields, what implications does this have for financial sovereignty abroad and the way that cross border payments are made and regulated globally? Will private companies exporting stablecoin versions of the dollar become informal arms of US monetary policy? With **real-time settlement, treasury visibility and embedded programmability** , stablecoins are solving core inefficiencies in cross-border commerce, but can regulation keep pace with innovation? And will financial institutions adapt quickly enough, or risk being disintermediated entirely? This is no longer merely about payment innovation, it is a re-alignment of financial infrastructure, value flows and global economic influence. Essentially, who owns the rails of tomorrow’s financial world and who controls the money flowing through them?

In Part 2 we review how blockchain technology is offering cross-border payment solutions, turning what used to take days into seconds and slashing costs along the way. Stablecoins, once fringe tools for crypto traders, have now processed more volume than Visa and Mastercard combined. And this is not theory; it is a seismic shift in how money moves. Ultimately, why trust a few Western-controlled pipes when programmable, borderless money is now possible? The future of global finance is now being written in blockchain code, in stablecoin policy and in who controls the next generation of rails. So, the question is not whether this will happen, it is who will own it, shape cross border payments.