---
title: "Unlocking illiquid assets: how tokenisation is democratising investment"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/unlocking-illiquid-assets-how-tokenisation"
---

# Unlocking illiquid assets: how tokenisation is democratising investment

*By Jonny Fry | *

Wealth has been odd for centuries: it is not liquid, easy to gain or easy to share. Most people who acquired great art, rare wines, antique vehicles or premium real estate did so because they could afford to buy them or had inherited them. They are typically stored in vaults, galleries and private estates - out of reach of the public and even the average investor. And technology is significantly altering this longstanding relationship. Tokenising assets, or dividing ownership into digital tokens on a blockchain, now makes these investments easier to access and available to more people. Furthermore, tokenisation is more than a blockchain buzzword - it converts asset rights into blockchain-based digital tokens. In addition, smart contracts allow tokens to be programmed, transferred and enforced - unlike paper certificates and private contracts. Unsurprisingly, this novel notion allows for new ways to split tangible and illiquid asset ownership.

**This abstract artwork sold for 10 ETH which is worth approximately $40,000, making it the biggest NFT sale on abstract ever**

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!wR53!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F0930ec87-905b-45c3-a936-1fabc28179ab_1020x1016.png)

Source:[ X](https://x.com/kickzeth/status/1928543009940943243)

Imagine a Renaissance artefact in a museum vault. Previously, only the institution or a wealthy auction buyer could claim ownership - but tokenisation impacts operations. A $50 million painting might be split into 500,000 $100 digital tokens. That is, people from around the world might buy these tokens to own a piece of the artwork and watch its value rise. And even though they are unable to hang the artwork in their living room, they can still sell it - the painting is no longer all-or-nothing. [The Uffizi Gallery in Florence](https://www.museumnext.com/article/uffizi-gallery-sells-nfts-to-recoup-pandemic-losses/) actually sold an NFT of a Michelangelo painting back in 2021 for $170,000, thus proving the demand for such digital assets; no doubt, this concept transcends art. In recent years, people have [tokenised a variety of assets](https://www.blockchainx.tech/luxury-item-tokenization/) such as designer handbags, rare whisky, collector trainers and racehorse shares. People have long considered the collectors’ and luxury product industry is small, hard to enter and risky - however, with tokenisation, these categories become similar to publicly traded equities, allowing exchange, division and access. In addition, the technique preserves the authenticity of these items. The item is insured, verified and typically stored in a trusted safe manner, irrespective of the people's ownership and participation shifting. Tokenisation makes marketplaces transparent, auditable and open when before, they were hidden and controlled by insiders.

Essentially, tokenisation's potential to provide something more democratic stems from making it easy for people to be involved. In the past, large amounts of money, insider access or an institutional tie was needed to participate in high-value assets. Tokenisation gives those who simply wish to invest a few hundred dollars the possibility to sign up today, and allows them to spread their investments across asset types that were previously only available to the very rich. As reported by [RWA.com](https://www.rwa.io/post/the-future-of-agricultural-assets-through-tokenization), tokenisation can be seen being used in the agriculture sector: “ _In Honduras, grains are being tokenized on a blockchain platform, ensuring transparent supply chains and fair pricing. Zambia has jumped on the bandwagon too, with farmland tokenization, allowing investors to support local agriculture by purchasing digital tokens representing land. These initiatives not only provide farmers with much-needed capital but also connect them with global markets.”_ Meanwhile, another example worth considering is real estate. Historically, commercial real estate was only accessible to institutions and wealthy investors, but tokenisation enables people around the world to own a piece of a [skyscraper in New York](https://www.ccn.com/a-30-million-manhattan-condo-was-just-tokenized-on-public-ethereum-blockchain/), an [office in Japan](https://www.ledgerinsights.com/mufg-japans-largest-bank-to-tokenize-real-estate-for-retail-investors/) or a [resort in Bali](https://tokeny.com/cofund-partners-with-tokeny-to-tokenize-real-world-assets-in-bali/). Resultant from this is that ownership becomes more democratic and marketplaces that required long-term commitments and complicated transactions become more liquid.

It is a well-known fact is that ownership has traditionally signified power and identification. Owning a Warhol painting, Rolex or Bordeaux vineyard allows people to feel they belong to cultural and economic places that were previously beyond reach. Tokenisation combines technology and culture, making it intriguing. Decentralised ownership records cannot be changed, and its blockchain programmability enables you to create complicated transfer, on-going royalty and compliance procedures in ways that historically had not been possible. Art, luxury and collections are cultural - for example, tokenising [Aboriginal art](https://cryptonews.com.au/news/australian-indigenous-yolngu-artists-are-entering-the-nft-space-94135/#:~:text=Indigenous%20Australian%20artists%20are%20digitising%20their%20work,stream%20of%20income%20and%20share%20their%20art) where the tales, emotions and histories are worth more than the money. Tokenising cultural objects connects them to a digital framework that makes them visible to everyone. The result is new business and thinking methods. [Non-fungible tokens (NFTs)](https://www.investopedia.com/non-fungible-tokens-nft-5115211) in the art industry rose in 2021, signalling this convergence. Digital art, which could be duplicated forever, became rare, traceable and traded; beyond money, the blockchain becomes a global culture registry.

However, one of the major issues has been selling high-value assets - e.g. although Picasso paintings and vintage Ferraris are valuable, selling them is difficult and time-consuming as special auctions, research and few buyers are needed. And even though they have high growth potential, their lack of liquidity makes them poor investments. Hence, secondary marketplaces (made easier to buy and sell by tokenisation) overcome this problem. That is, instead of waiting months for an auction, token holders may sell their Picasso painting on a digital marketplace in minutes. Moreover, trading asset fractions gives investors more possibilities because it simplifies portfolio rebalancing, capital release and market response. These assets become financial system players with liquidity, and the impact is huge - art, luxury goods, fine wine, real estate and sports franchises are trillion-dollar markets that can undoubtedly benefit from additional liquidity. Furthermore, since assets are always appraised through global market activity instead of occasional auctions or closed-door talks, this could attract more individuals to engage and so help uncover pricing faster.

Nonetheless, despite its transformative potential, tokenisation is not without challenges. Questions of regulation, custody, authenticity and market volatility loom large. For one, regulatory frameworks are still catching up. For example, is a tokenised asset a security, subject to strict financial oversight, or is it a collectible with more lenient treatment? Different jurisdictions answer this question differently, creating a patchwork of rules that can complicate global participation. And without clear regulation, both issuers and investors face uncertainties that could hinder adoption. Custody is another issue - if a bottle of 1961 Château Latour is tokenised and fractionalised, who safeguards the actual bottle? How is it insured, and what happens if it is damaged or destroyed? Hence, tokenisation depends on trust in custodianship, and ensuring rigorous standards in this area is vital for credibility. Authenticity can also not be overlooked - the value of art and luxury goods rests heavily on their authenticity, provenance and condition. Blockchain may provide tamper-proof records once established, but initial authentication still relies on human expertise whereby leaving room for disputes and fraud if not carefully managed. Moreover, volatility is undoubtedly a concern - whilst tokenisation opens access, it also exposes new investors to the fluctuations of markets that are inherently speculative. So, just as cryptocurrencies have shown extreme volatility, tokenised luxury goods or art could experience dramatic swings in value, particularly in early stages when markets are thinly traded.

However,**** tokenisation may be its most underrated feature: it affects wealth perception. Historically, wealth meant having things others could not yet tokenisation redefines wealth as participation. But this does not prevent shortages. A Monet painting is rare yet dividing it does not make it less culturally unique. People's ownership evolves from individual to collective and shared delight in possession makes wealth symbols more accessible. Nonetheless, it thus begs the question of how society values ownership. Does owning an extraordinary picture change if a million people own it? And if more people can afford the picture, does it gain value or lose its magic? Therefore, financial and cultural challenges can arise simultaneously. In essence, tokenisation aims to build a global asset marketplace where people with internet access should be able to trade, invest and utilise this marketplace. Imagine an online portal where Kenyan investors can buy Swiss watches, Brazilian investors can acquire Manhattan buildings and Indian students can buy rare trainers or sneakers as the Americans call them - this idea certainly suits the financial inclusion movement. In a similar way that mobile banking made financial services available in regions not occupied by traditional banks, then tokenisation might help people worldwide build wealth. So, as digital systems become more prevalent, tokenised assets can reduce the wealth gap and adding tokenised assets to [DeFi networks](https://hedera.com/learning/decentralized-finance/what-is-decentralized-finance) could accelerate this trend. Consider borrowing against your partial ownership of a rare car or wine collection without a broker - many options exist to produce new credit, lending and financial innovations.

Meanwhile, illiquid asset tokenisation is a major financial shift of the 21st century. Tokenisation turns exclusivity into accessibility, illiquidity into liquidity and static ownership into dynamic involvement, making wealth more accessible. Clearly there are challenges, but regulatory clarity, strong custodianship and investor education is required. Notably, direction is apparent - more high-value assets will be available when tokenisation breaks down financial sector boundaries. We are approaching a future where millions can own a Warhol, Parisian flat or Rolex. We are creating new marketplaces and altering what it means to own, invest and participate in the global economy. Instead of whether tokenisation will make investment more accessible, the question is how quickly it will disrupt our cultural and financial landscapes. Ultimately, by liberating illiquid assets, we may be starting a new capitalism that blends culture, technology and openness in ways our ancestors never imagined.