---
title: "Unlocking the potential of private credit markets for SMEs through blockchain technology "
description: "Blockchain technology is transforming private credit markets by improving access to financing for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) - which are crucial to global employment and economic growth but often face funding challenges. By enabling direct, secure transactions through smart contracts, blockchain reduces costs, enhances transparency and supports decentralised credit scoring, thus democratising credit access. The private credit market, currently valued at $1.5 trillion, is projected to virtually double by 2028. And, despite regulatory and cost hurdles, blockchain’s potential to create a more inclusive, efficient financial system could significantly empower SMEs and drive sustainable economic growth."
date: 2024-11-18
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/unlocking-the-potential-of-private
year: 2024
---

# Unlocking the potential of private credit markets for SMEs through blockchain technology 

Small medium enterprises (SMEs) are vital contributors to economic development, as they promote innovation and generate jobs. According to [the EU](https://www.eurofound.europa.eu/en/topic/small-and-medium-sized-enterprises): “ _They [SMEs] represent 99% of all businesses in the EU. In the past five years, they have created around 85% of new jobs and provided two-thirds of the total private sector employment in the EU.”_ Unfortunately, securing financing remains a major obstacle for many SMEs, particularly in regions where traditional lending options are scarce. Technologies such as [blockchain and AI are poised to make a significant impact in overcoming these financial challenges](https://www.privateequityinternational.com/blockchain-and-ai-poised-to-unlock-access-to-private-equity/). Blockchain, in particular, can simplify transactions, improve transparency and facilitate fractional ownership potentially transforming access to private credit markets, and this financial democratisation could provide SMEs with the necessary capital to grow and increase employment, thereby enhancing economic resilience.

The role of SMEs is vital to global economic stability in accounting for over [90% of all businesses](https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/smefinance#:~:text=The%20International%20Finance%20Corporation%20\(IFC,of%20the%20global%20MSME%20lending) and contributing to more than half of global employment. In emerging markets, the significance of SMEs is even more pronounced, representing 70% of formal job creation and driving economic growth whilst helping to alleviate poverty. And, as the global population continues to rise, estimates suggest that 600 million additional jobs will be necessary by 2030. Hence, supporting SMEs in their growth and creating new opportunities is essential for ensuring long-term economic growth and addressing future workforce demands. However, although SMEs play a crucial role in driving economic growth, they encounter significant obstacles particularly in securing financing, which ranks as the second most critical barrier to their expansion.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!VkQy!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fc0e12d78-6de6-4c1d-a62b-de70c5beef76_982x550.png)

Source: TeamBlockchain Ltd (Prequin & IMF Staff)

This challenge is particularly severe in developing countries, where the potential for SMEs to positively impact economies remains largely unrealised. According to the International Finance Corporation (IFC), around [65 million SMEs worldwide (representing 40% of formal micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) in developing regions) face unmet financing needs](https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/smefinance#:~:text=The%20International%20Finance%20Corporation%20\(IFC,of%20the%20global%20MSME%20lending\)) that total approximately $5.2 trillion each year - this figure is equivalent to 1.4 times the current level of global micro, small and medium enterprises’ lending. Furthermore, there are significant regional variations in the financing gap, with East Asia and the Pacific accounting for 46%, Latin America and the Caribbean contributing 23%, and Europe and Central Asia making up 15%. Disturbingly, around half of formal SMEs struggle to access credit, with micro and informal businesses experiencing even more severe difficulties and hence, in this context, alternative credit solutions are gaining attention. For instance, UBS reports managing [$262 billion in assets across various alternative credit sectors](https://www.ubs.com/global/en/assetmanagement/capabilities/private-credit.html?campID=ALTERNATIVECREDIT-GLOBAL-ENG-GOOGLE-Alternative_Credit_-_Generic-Generic_-_Private_Debt-debt_funding-BROAD-ANY&gad_source=1&gclid=CjwKCAjw3624BhBAEiwAkxgTOiUstXVL3ZWFoChTEpMKmSXKwMoVXlDGHb9CmyDvudnXNEjepzgrPhoC4jYQAvD_BwE), demonstrating a growing focus on providing financial solutions that can help bridge the capital shortage faced by SMEs. Certainly, addressing these financial barriers could unlock immense potential for economic growth and job creation, underscoring the urgent need for innovative solutions (such as blockchain-powered platforms) to facilitate access to private credit markets globally.

Meanwhile, the private credit market is undergoing remarkable growth, with projections estimating it will [reach $2.8 trillion by 2028, rising from around $1.5 trillion at the start of 2024](https://www.morganstanley.com/ideas/private-credit-outlook-considerations). This growth is primarily driven by the increasing demand for non-bank lending alternatives, especially as traditional bank financing tightens. In the US, the addressable market for private credit is [anticipated to exceed $30 trillion](https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/private-capital/our-insights/the-next-era-of-private-credit), signifying a vast opportunity for growth. Private credit is also an essential funding avenue for SMEs, offering customised financial solutions that banks frequently do not provide. And, unlike traditional loans, private credit can be tailored to suit the unique needs of borrowers, whether regarding transaction size, timing or type. This market includes various lending strategies, such as direct lending, mezzanine financing, distressed debt and special situations, each designed to address different borrower profiles and risk tolerances. With the evolution of the landscape, private credit is seeing a diversification of capital sources, particularly with notable inflows from retail investors and insurance companies. This change is promoting competition and innovation in the sector, opening doors for both seasoned and emerging market participants to refine their offerings and better support SMEs' financing requirements. The future of private credit is characterised by a broader array of asset classes and financing structures, fostering ecosystem partnerships and open-architecture business models that promote collaboration among different market players. Larger firms are leveraging their scale to enhance sourcing and fundraising efforts, providing them with a competitive edge, whilst technological advancements are being harnessed to boost performance and improve risk management. These developments indicate that private credit is not merely a growing segment but a vital component of the financial ecosystem, particularly in supporting the financing needs of SMEs.

In addition, blockchain technology is beginning to significantly impact the private credit market, particularly by increasing transparency, improving efficiency, reducing costs and enhancing security. One of the foremost benefits of blockchain technology is its [secure and transparent method of recording transactions](https://www2.deloitte.com/kz/en/pages/strategy-operations/solutions/blockchain-services-and-solutions.html) which significantly reduces fraud and the need for intermediaries. In its report on blockchain in lending, [Deloitte emphasises](https://www2.deloitte.com/kz/en/pages/strategy-operations/solutions/blockchain-services-and-solutions.html) that this technology provides a mechanism for real-time transaction tracking and verification, enhancing the lending process's efficiency. Blockchain-based loans take advantage of this technology to facilitate and document transactions, delivering increased efficiency, security, transparency and cost savings. For instance, [Centrifuge's](https://centrifuge.io/) platform illustrates how blockchain can improve transparency, allowing all participants to effortlessly access and verify transaction histories. However, unlike conventional bank loans, which involve set interest rates and terms determined by a banking platform and typically include intermediaries, [blockchain-based loans allow borrowers and investors to connect directly](https://www.intive.com/insights/breaking-the-bank-how-blockchain-is-reinventing-loans). The loan's terms and conditions are encoded within a smart contract, removing the necessity for a bank or third party and this innovative model enables borrowers to secure lower interest rates whilst offering higher returns for investors by avoiding intermediary fees. Moreover, smart contracts automate the loan execution process and manage agreements regarding overdue payments, simplifying the overall loan management. Ultimately, blockchain-based loans have the potential to transform lending practices, making them faster, more secure and more efficient for everyone involved.

Blockchain technology also stands out in improving efficiency in loan processing, mainly due to the adoption of smart contracts. These self-operating contracts automate both loan origination and servicing, which helps to decrease operational costs and speed up transaction times. [PwC's evaluation of blockchain's impact](https://www.pwc.com/us/en/tech-effect/emerging-tech/tokenization-in-financial-services.html) on lending indicates that platforms, such as [Credix, harness this technology](https://credix.finance/) to enhance loan management, making it easier for lenders and borrowers to connect directly. The tokenisation of private credit is also a key development, enabling debt instruments to be divided into tradeable tokens and this innovative approach enhances liquidity in the market, allowing a broader array of investors to participate. [Forbes emphasises this shift in its coverage of how tokenisation is rethinking money creation](https://www.forbes.com/sites/jonegilsson/2024/09/01/rethinking-money-creation-as-private-credit-tokenization-surges/), with [Maple Finance](https://maple.finance/) serving as a notable example of how tokenised assets can provide strategic advantages to institutions equipped with blockchain-ready infrastructure. And, according to [McKinsey](https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-insights/from-ripples-to-waves-the-transformational-power-of-tokenizing-assets): _“Tokenised financial assets are moving from pilot to at-scale deployment.”_ So, whilst adoption is not yet widespread, financial institutions that have already established blockchain capabilities will likely gain a significant strategic advantage in the evolving landscape. Furthermore, as these institutions integrate tokenisation into their operations, they will be better positioned to capitalise on new market opportunities, streamline processes and attract a diverse range of investors seeking innovative financing solutions.

Moreover, blockchain democratises credit access by allowing a broader range of investors and borrowers to participate. The World Economic Forum’s emphasis of such correlates to platforms such as [Aave's decentralised finance framework](https://aave.com/) which provides those individuals without traditional banking access the ability to secure loans, thereby encouraging inclusivity in the credit market. Smart contracts also play a crucial role in risk mitigation by enforcing agreements and significantly reducing default risks. McKinsey also discusses the impact of blockchain technology in financial markets which could be corresponded with models such as [Clearpool’s uncollateralised lending](https://clearpool.finance/), which exemplifies this principle in action. Finally, blockchain enables the development of decentralised credit scoring systems, providing alternatives for borrowers who lack conventional credit histories. And, as [Cointelegraph](https://cointelegraph.com/news/decentralized-credit-scores-how-can-blockchain-tech-change-ratings) explains, platforms such as [Goldfinch utilise decentralised protocols](https://goldfinch.finance/) to assess creditworthiness using diverse data sources, thereby expanding access to financial services for underserved populations. Meanwhile, the World Economic Forum emphasises [that, as the initial hype around distributed ledger technology diminishes, there is a crucial need for standards and controls](https://www.weforum.org/stories/2024/01/digital-financial-markets-developing-standards-controls-davos24/) to ensure the effective integration of this technology into our financial systems. Industry leaders such as DTCC, Clearstream and Euroclear have collaborated to publish a white paper that outlines the financial industry's ongoing evolution in digital assets. Hence, establishing robust standards will be vital in enhancing the viability of blockchain-powered credit systems and ensuring they operate effectively within the broader financial landscape.

Ultimately, urgent action is required to empower SMEs by improving their access to financing. Utilising blockchain technology can help us establish financial systems that are more transparent, efficient and accessible, thereby supporting the growth of these critical economic players. Stakeholders - including financial institutions, technology providers and policymakers - are encouraged to invest in blockchain solutions that facilitate SME development whilst also bolstering broader economic resilience. In essence, by focusing on these investments, we can foster a more inclusive financial environment that stimulates innovation and drives sustainable economic growth for all.
