---
title: "NFTs and historical preservation"
description: "The advent of blockchain technology has brought about revolutionary changes across various sectors, and the realm of cultural heritage is no exception. Non-fungible tokens -unique digital assets verified using blockchain technology - have emerged as a powerful tool for the digitisation, preservation and monetisation of cultural heritage. Digital assets are also transforming the way we protect, share and benefit from our cultural legacy - being embraced by global museums and even the Vatican."
date: 2024-09-10
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/nfts-and-historical-preservation
year: 2024
---

# NFTs and historical preservation

Non-fungible tokens (NFTs) are digital assets - akin to a digital certificate - that represent ownership or proof of authenticity of a unique item or piece of content with the data recorded on blockchain. Unlike cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin or Ethereum or indeed physical money, which are fungible and can be exchanged on a one-to-one basis, NFTs are unique and cannot be exchanged on a like-for-like basis. This uniqueness is what makes NFTs ideal for representing ownership of digital art, car ownership, collectibles and, importantly, historical artifacts. When the auctioneer, Christie’s, sold its first NFT, ‘ _Everydays - The First 5000 Days’_ by digital artist, Beeple, [for $63million,](https://seekingalpha.com/article/4479683-what-is-an-nft) NFTs snatched the headlines. Moreover, they offer several advantages for the preservation and monetisation of cultural heritage. One of the challenges of anything rare, including antiquities, is their provenance; NFTs provide a transparent and immutable ledger of ownership and history. Of equal importance is that this immutable record provides a secure and transparent trail, reducing the risk of forgery and ensuring the integrity of historical items. Each NFT contains [metadata](https://www.avast.com/c-what-is-metadata#:~:text=Metadata%20is%20a%20set%20of,understand%2C%20use%2C%20and%20manage.) that records the provenance of the item it represents, ensuring that its authenticity and history are preserved forever. NFTs also enable the digital representation of physical artifacts, allowing them to be preserved, shared and exhibited online. This digitisation can be complemented with high-resolution images, 3D scans and augmented reality (AR) experiences, enhancing the accessibility and engagement of cultural heritage.

**Michelangelo’s ‘Tondo Doni’ sold by the Uffizi gallery**

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!F8-2!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fa3c2ac96-4ae6-4565-9bae-9d9e6bad9f56_1096x1038.png)

Source: [X](https://x.com/McLoughlinArt/status/1546384441215520768)

Furthermore, NFTs present novel revenue opportunities for cultural institutions - by tokenising digital representations of artifacts and artworks, museums and galleries can create new income streams through the sale or auction of NFTs. These sales can fund further digitisation projects, conservation efforts and community programs, enhancing the sustainability of cultural institutions.**** Museums such as the [Uffizi in Florence and the British Museum](https://www.museumnext.com/article/museums-and-nfts/) in London have used NFTs to both display art and monetise their collections using NFTs. However, the Italian Government has ceased the sale of NFTs to protect museums and avoid unfair contracts (given that NFTs are unregulated) and, interestingly, have been [excluded](https://www.twobirds.com/en/insights/2024/global/markets-in-crypto-assets-new-eu-law-on-crypto-assets) from the EU MiCA regulations. Meanwhile, by leveraging blockchain technology, NFTs facilitate decentralised ownership and access to cultural assets, and this model democratises access to cultural heritage so allowing global audiences to both engage with and own pieces of history without geographical or economic barriers. Museums, galleries and cultural institutions are increasingly adopting NFTs to create digital twins of physical artifacts, documents and artworks. These digital representations can include detailed descriptions, historical context and multimedia content, making them more accessible and engaging for researchers, educators and the general public. As a report from [University College of London](https://www.mgmt.ucl.ac.uk/sites/default/files/upload/pdfs/British%20Museum%20-%20Blockchain%20.pdf) has highlighted, there are a number of ways museums and institutions can use blockchain-powered databases to store the provenance data of artifacts. These databases are accessible to researchers, collectors and the public whereby enhancing transparency and trust in the authenticity of cultural assets.

Notably, [the Smithsonian Institution](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Smithsonian-Institution), one of the world’s largest and most renowned museums, has embraced NFTs to digitise and share its vast collection. Through partnerships with blockchain platforms, the Smithsonian has begun creating NFTs of digital artworks, historical documents and artifacts, making them accessible to a global audience; this initiative not only preserves the institution’s heritage but also opens new avenues for funding and engagement.**** Museums and artists are also exploring the creation of limited-edition digital artworks and collectibles tied to historical themes. Furthermore, these NFTs can attract collectors, enthusiasts and philanthropists, generating funds for preservation and educational initiatives[. The Los Angeles County Museum of Art, the Pompidou Centre in Paris and the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art](https://www.economist.com/culture/2023/11/30/museums-are-learning-to-love-nfts) have all bought NFTs, thus demonstrating that museums are buyers as well as sellers of NFTs.**** NFTs also empower contemporary artists and creators to engage with historical themes and cultural heritage using NFT marketplaces such as Opensea, Foundation, SuperRare, Mintable and Wax; by creating NFTs inspired by historical artifacts, artists can contribute to the preservation narrative while reaching new audiences. Undoubtedly, this collaboration between traditional cultural institutions and contemporary creators fosters innovation and cross-disciplinary dialogue.

But, whilst NFTs offer exciting possibilities they also raise ethical and legal concerns - particularly in the context of cultural heritage. Hence, it would be prudent to handle the commercialisation of cultural heritage through NFTs with sensitivity and respect. Furthermore, issues of cultural appropriation and ownership rights must be addressed, ensuring that communities and nations are neither exploited nor disenfranchised. The use of NFTs for historical artifacts and artworks requires careful consideration of intellectual property rights - ensuring that rights holders are fairly compensated and that digital representations do not infringe on existing copyrights or moral rights is essential. Meanwhile, the adoption of NFTs in cultural preservation also faces technological and accessibility challenges because the widespread adoption of NFTs requires education and awareness regarding blockchain technology and NFTs. Therefore, building digital literacy and understanding amongst museum staff, researchers and the public is crucial for successful implementation. Unsurprisingly, there are [concerns regarding the energy consumption](https://timestech.in/nfts-and-environmental-impact-exploring-sustainability-in-the-digital-era/#:~:text=The%20NFT%20Boom%20and%20its%20Environmental%20Concerns%3A&text=The%20blockchain%20technology%20that%20underlies,a%20topic%20of%20intense%20debate.) associated with blockchain technology and NFTs; particularly the use of [proof of work (PoW) consensus mechanisms](https://blockworks.co/news/what-is-proof-of-work) has raised environmental concerns. Hence, the exploration of energy-efficient blockchain solutions and sustainable practices is essential to mitigate the ecological impact of NFT projects.

In addition, the integration of NFTs with augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR) technologies is set to revolutionise the experience of cultural heritage. AR and VR can enhance the interactivity and immersion of digital artifacts, allowing users to experience historical objects and sites in novel and engaging ways, e.g. the [Notre-Dame](https://www.autodesk.com/design-make/articles/notre-dame-virtual-tour#:~:text=%E2%80%9CWe%20aim%20to%20make%20Notre,Image%20courtesy%20of%20Histovery.) in Paris that was devastated by fire is set to use AR to help improve and enrich the visitor experience by providing deeper insights into the historical heritage of the building. A virtual exhibit of the Notre-Dame has been taken to nearly twenty museums and monuments in France and in Germany to offer an immersive experience about the history of this world-famous building.

And the future of NFTs in cultural preservation will likely see increased collaboration between global institutions, artists, and communities; these partnerships can create cross-cultural projects that celebrate shared heritage and promote global understanding. By working together, stakeholders can develop innovative solutions that address common challenges in preservation and access. Meanwhile, ensuring that local communities and [indigenous groups have a voice in NFT projects](https://www.cryptoaltruism.org/blog/three-nft-projects-elevating-indigenous-art-and-culture) involving their cultural heritage is essential. Hence, developing ethical frameworks that prioritise consent, collaboration and benefit-sharing is crucial to safeguarding the interests and rights of communities.**** Engaging community representatives in the planning, development and decision-making processes of NFT projects ensures that cultural heritage is respected and protected and creating industry standards and guidelines for NFT projects in cultural heritage is vital for promoting best practices and ensuring ethical and sustainable development - these standards can cover issues such as provenance verification, intellectual property rights, environmental sustainability and community engagement.

In essence, NFTs are revolutionising the preservation, digitisation and monetisation of cultural heritage - even the [Vatican](https://decrypt.co/235956/holy-tokens-vatican-library-giving-donors-nfts) and its 15th century library is using NFTs to make its collection of 180,000 manuscripts and over 1.5 million books more accessible on a global basis. By leveraging blockchain technology, NFTs offer unprecedented opportunities to protect, share and benefit from our global cultural legacy. From enhancing transparency and provenance to creating new revenue streams and fostering cross-cultural collaborations, NFTs are redefining the future of cultural preservation. However, as the technology and its applications continue to evolve, stakeholders must navigate ethical, legal and technological challenges to ensure that NFTs serve as a force for positive change in the world of cultural heritage. Hence, through innovative solutions and collaborative efforts, NFTs have the potential to make history accessible, engaging and sustainable for generations to come.
