---
title: " The economic impact of digital money"
description: "There is a growing body of evidence as to the impact of digital money on our lives and the economy. However, whether blockchain technology will be the ‘silver bullet,’ technology wise, is still to be determined. Whilst these digital currencies could streamline payments, reduce costs and expand access to financial services, their economic impact remains complex and mixed. Overall, the successful integration of digital money depends on thoughtful regulation, technological infrastructure and public acceptance."
date: 2024-09-03
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/the-economic-impact-of-digital-money
year: 2024
---

#  The economic impact of digital money

The impact of digital money, such as tokenised deposits, stablecoins and central bank digital currencies, (CBDCs) on our economies is a subject of increasing academic interest and practical exploration. These digital forms of currency offer transformative possibilities for financial systems worldwide, promising increased efficiency, broader financial inclusion and spurring innovation. Still, there are mixed views, with some claiming that digital money will positively impact our lives whilst other researchers are more sceptical. Digital currencies can significantly streamline payment processes, reducing both time and cost associated with traditional banking systems, and this efficiency is particularly beneficial for cross-border transactions which are often slow and expensive. By lowering transaction costs and time, businesses can operate more efficiently, so encouraging trade and economic activity. Research from the [Bank for International Settlements](https://www.bis.org/publ/othp38.pdf) (BIS) highlights that CBDCs could reduce the cost of cross-border payments by up to 50% since they eliminate the need for intermediaries and reduce settlement times. Interestingly, [JP Morgan](https://www.ledgerinsights.com/jp-morgan-says-jpm-coin-transactions-have-exploded-because-of-programmability/) has found that there has been less interest in actually being able to make payments 24/7 - i.e., when asleep. However, as regards being able to offer programmability, then Umar Farooq, who heads Onyx by JP Morgan, has commented that: “ _We’ve seen the number of transactions explode by factors of ten, if not hundreds. Fewer larger transactions, lots of smaller transactions. On some days the transaction volumes reach the high single-digit billions of dollars.”_

Meanwhile, digital currencies can provide financial services to unbanked and underbanked populations, offering them a means to save, invest and transact - and this inclusion can stimulate economic growth by enabling more people to participate in the economy. Moreover, with research dating back to 2016, [McKinsey](https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/employment-and-growth/how-digital-finance-could-boost-growth-in-emerging-economies) has estimated that: “ _Adoption and use of digital finance could increase the GDPs of all emerging economies by 6 percent, or a total of $3.7 trillion. This is the equivalent of adding to the world an economy the size of Germany, or one that’s larger than all the economies of Africa. This additional GDP could create up to 95 million new jobs across all sectors of the economy_ ”. However, research from [Copenhagen Economics](https://www.ebf.eu/wp-content/uploads/2023/12/Effects-of-a-Digital-Euro-on-Financial-Stability-and-Consumer-Welfare_CE-Report_December2023.pdf) has reported that a CDBC is likely to have very little impact for the financially excluded in Europe - i.e., the [13million people in the EU](https://www.wsbi-esbg.org/number-of-unbanked-adult-eu-citizens-more-than-halved-in-the-last-four-years/#:~:text=BRUSSELS%2C%2014%20July%202022%20%E2%80%93%20The,continue%20contributing%20to%20financial%20inclusion.) who are unbanked. Indeed, “… _Many of the design features of the digital euro intended to cater to the demands of the financially excluded can be provided more efficiently through already existing solutions. There are numerous examples of how EU governments have developed targeted solutions for vulnerable groups, operated by banks or other financial service providers. One example is the European Payment Accounts Directive, which allows universal access to basic payment services. The drastic reduction in the number of financially excluded people over the last years (from 8.2% in 2017 to 3.6% in 2021) strongly suggests that ongoing initiatives have already improved financial inclusion through existing solutions and will continue to do so.”_

In addition, the adoption of digital currencies can drive technological innovation so leading to the development of new financial products and services. And this innovation can create new business opportunities and jobs, so contributing to economic growth. The rise of DeFi platforms has also shown how digital currencies can lead to financial innovation; by providing decentralised financial services such as lending, borrowing and trading, DeFi platforms create new markets and opportunities for economic growth. But, unsurprisingly, there are mixed views as to the impact of digital money. [The BIS](https://www.bis.org/publ/work1196.pdf) has published a working paper on digital payments, informality and economic growth with the research finding that “ _a one-percentage point increase in digital payments use is associated with increases in the growth of GDP per capita of 0.10 percentage points over a two-year period, and a decline in the share of informal sector employment of 0.06 percentage points over a two-year period._ ” However, when reporting on the potential impact of a CBDC, [Copenhagen Economics’ study](https://www.ebf.eu/wp-content/uploads/2023/12/Effects-of-a-Digital-Euro-on-Financial-Stability-and-Consumer-Welfare_CE-Report_December2023.pdf) estimated it “ _could lead to a permanent reduction in GDP of 0.12-0.34_ %.” And trust in financial markets is a paramount concern for regulators in all jurisdictions in order for us all to maintain confidence that financial transactions can be relied upon. However, the majority of countries and banking systems rely on fractional banking which means that when we deposit money in a bank it no longer remains our money but becomes the bank’s money - i.e., they are able to lend our deposits to homeowners, business, etc. But this also means the depositors become creditors to the bank and, hence, if everyone wanted their money back at the same time, the banks would not be able to satisfy the demand. Meantime, digital money can be backed by actual cash deposits that are ringfenced and held securely and so, in effect, digital money becomes a bearer instrument that can be used to pay for transactions on a peer-to- peer basis. In turn, this can not only reduce the number of intermediaries involved but also enable almost real time payments and reduce counterparty risks. As a result, this can improve trust and eliminates both the reliance on a third party or risking that the payment will or will not be honoured.

In addition, CBDCs can enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy by providing central banks with a more direct tool for influencing the economy. They can also improve the transmission of monetary policy so allowing for more precise control over money supply and interest rates. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) suggests that CBDCs could improve monetary policy effectiveness by providing central banks with real-time data on money flows and enable more targeted interventions. [The IMF believes that:](https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/journals/063/2023/011/article-A001-en.xml) “ _If properly designed to address the barriers to financial inclusion, CBDCs have the opportunity to gain acceptance by the financially excluded for digital payments. CBDC can then serve as an entry point to the broader formal financial system.”_ Meanwhile, China’s pilot of its digital yuan demonstrates how CBDCs can be used to enhance monetary policy. By tracking transactions in real-time, the digital yuan allows for more accurate economic data collection and policy adjustments, potentially leading to more stable economic growth - although there will be some that are concerned about how a CBDC such as China’s digital yuan is able to track and trace citizens’ spending. As a way to increase adoption, the [digital yuan is being given to Chinese citizens](https://www.scmp.com/economy/china-economy/article/3106265/china-digital-currency-shenzhen-consumers-spend-88-million) selected randomly but with is a restriction of where the money can be spent. And, as part of being available internationally, the digital yuan is now been [introduced to Hong Kong](https://www.reuters.com/markets/currencies/hong-kong-allows-chinas-digital-yuan-be-used-local-shops-2024-05-17/)

In 2023, the amount of monies sent from one country to another (typically to support friends and families) exceeded [$730billion](https://finance.yahoo.com/news/global-remittance-industry-report-2024-111200515.html) globally, and it is estimated that this will rise to over $1trillion by 2029. According to the [World Bank](https://remittanceprices.worldbank.org/), the cost to make these foreign exchange transfers can be more than 13% with an average 6.35% for a $200 transaction. The FinTech firm, [Bvnk, claims that](https://www.bvnk.com/blog/stablecoins) “ _moving funds from Southeast Asia to Europe can be 3-4x cheaper when using stablecoins instead of the Swift network, while transfers from Africa to Europe can be up 5-10x cheaper_ ” - although, according to the [Copenhagen Economics](https://www.ebf.eu/wp-content/uploads/2023/12/Effects-of-a-Digital-Euro-on-Financial-Stability-and-Consumer-Welfare_CE-Report_December2023.pdf) institute that looked at the impact of a € CDBC “ _as a large-scale project that can be highly complex to implement, the digital euro will create a set of additional launch and recurring costs for commercial banks, other PSPs, and merchants in general. The additional costs imposed on these market participants will at least partly be passed on to consumers in the form of higher prices of goods and services. Likewise, increased costs for the ECB in setting up and running the digital euro will partly erode the profits of the central banks and constitute lost public revenues, which ultimately results in higher taxes on the margin.”_ Currently, much of the work being carried out and most, but not all, of the digital money options are powered by blockchain technology. Interestingly, a notable exception is the Chinese digital yuan which is not operated using a blockchain. The [MIT believes](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/59aae5e9a803bb10bedeb03e/t/61fc26416d8ab073983b4533/1643914817636/Hamilton-Exec-Summary-2022-02-02-v1.pdf): “ _A CBDC can provide functionality that is not currently possible with either cash or bank accounts. For example, a CBDC could support cryptographic proofs of payment, more complex transfers to or from multiple sources of funds, and flexible forms of authorization to spend, such as varying transaction limits. We found that separating a transaction processor into modular components improves system scalability and flexibility; for example, we can scale and replicate transaction validation independently from preventing double spending and committing transactions, and our architecture can support many future designs for programmability and privacy. Despite using ideas from blockchain technology, we found that a distributed ledger operating under the jurisdiction of different actors was not needed to achieve our goals. By breaking transaction processing into steps like creation, authorization, submission, execution, and storing history, CBDC designers can consider the potential roles for intermediaries at each stage, creating opportunities for innovation_.” In reality, though, and for the foreseeable future, there will be some digital money solutions using blockchain technology whilst others may well opt for a different technological option.

Essentially, digital money - through tokenised deposits, stablecoins and CBDCs - holds transformative potential for enhancing economic growth. By improving transaction efficiency, increasing financial inclusion, stimulating innovation, providing stability, enhancing monetary policy and offering transparency, digital currencies can address many of the challenges faced by traditional financial systems. However, realising this potential requires careful consideration of regulatory frameworks, technological infrastructure and public acceptance. And as countries and financial institutions explore the integration of digital currencies into their economies, the focus should be on creating an environment that supports innovation whilst ensuring security and stability. The journey towards a digital currency-driven economy is complex, but the potential rewards for economic growth and development would appear to be substantial.
