---
title: "Digital money and the gig economy (Part 2)"
description: "The gig economy, supported by platforms such Uber and Upwork, is transforming traditional work by emphasising short-term, flexible jobs. Digital money, particularly cryptocurrencies, is further reshaping this space by enabling fast, borderless payments and offering financial inclusion. However, challenges such as currency volatility and regulatory uncertainty persist. Yet, despite these hurdles, digital currencies have the potential to create a more efficient and inclusive global labour market within the evolving gig economy."
date: 2024-10-01
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/digital-money-and-the-gig-economy
year: 2024
---

# Digital money and the gig economy (Part 2)

Part 1 of ‘Digital money and the gig economy’ looked at how the gig economy is growing, fuelled by the rise of digital platforms such as Uber, Upwork and Fiverr. This shift in the labour market has created both opportunities and challenges for workers and employers alike. The focus in Part 2 is on how digital money has emerged as a potentially transformative force in the gig economy. Offering new ways to conduct transactions, manage payments and create decentralised work platforms, cryptocurrency is reshaping how freelancers and companies interact globally. Indeed, [Uber has recently announced that it will be accepting Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies as a form of payment](https://en.cryptonomist.ch/2024/07/11/uber-the-ceo-states-that-the-company-will-soon-accept-payments-in-bitcoin-and-crypto/#:~:text=%E2%80%9CDara%20Khosrowshahi%2C%20CEO%20of%20Uber,method%20in%20the%20near%20future.%E2%80%9D). And, whilst global gig platforms such as Upwork and Fiverr do not accept digital currencies, they both accept PayPal so, in theory, at least customers could use PayPal’s stablecoin (PYUSD).

One of the most [significant impacts of digital money on the gig economy](https://www.swanlana.com/crypto-news-today/cryptocurrency-and-the-gig-economy/) is the facilitation of global payments. Freelancers often work for clients in different countries, and traditional payment methods such as bank transfers or credit card payments can be slow, expensive and subject to foreign exchange fees. Cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin, Ethereum and the growing selection of stablecoins offer a solution by enabling near-instantaneous, borderless transactions. Cryptocurrencies operate on decentralised networks, meaning they are not tied to any specific country or banking system. This allows for seamless cross-border payments, which are particularly advantageous in the gig economy, and digital nomads where freelancers may be located in countries with less developed financial systems. And, by using digital currencies, freelancers can avoid high bank fees, long processing times and unfavourable exchange rates.

Digital money also can promote financial inclusion - especially to the [1.4billion people](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2024/07/why-financial-inclusion-is-the-key-to-a-thriving-digital-economy/#:~:text=Globally%20there%20are%201.4%20billion,mobile%20money%20transfers%20and%20microloans.) globally who are unbanked - by providing access to payment systems for individuals in regions where traditional banking services are limited or non-existent but where users have access to the internet. In many developing countries, freelancers struggle with receiving payments due to inadequate banking infrastructure or restrictive government policies; digital money offers an alternative, enabling these workers to participate in the global gig economy without the need for a traditional bank account.

Moreover, traditional payment methods often involve intermediaries such banks, credit card companies or payment processors, each of which may charge fees. Credit and debit cards are increasingly being used, but the cost of paying for goods and services varies considerably and can be as high as [6% (according to Forbes](https://www.forbes.com/uk/advisor/business/credit-card-processing-fees/)). And, digital money transactions can be processed with lower fees than traditional banking transactions. For instance, [Shopify](https://www.shopify.com/blog/paypal-fees) reminds us that with “ _a payment from outside the US, PayPal will charge you the regular domestic transaction fee plus an additional 1.5%.”_ Payments typically cost much less using digital money, which is particularly beneficial for gig workers who can retain more of their earnings. Furthermore, digital currencies are well-suited for microtransactions, which are small payments often associated with gig work. Traditional payment systems may not efficiently handle microtransactions due to high fees (making them uneconomical), however, cryptocurrencies, particularly those designed for scalability such as Litecoin or [Nano, can process microtransactions](https://stormgain.com/blog/top-cryptocurrencies-for-microtransactions) efficiently so enabling gig workers to be paid even for very small tasks. Essentially, digital money is typically powered using blockchain technology and hence uses cryptography, so offers enhanced privacy and security features compared to traditional payment methods. This is increasingly important in the gig economy where workers may be concerned about their financial privacy and the security of their payments. Gig workers being paid in digital money do not need to disclose sensitive personal information, such as bank account details or credit card numbers, which reduces the risk of identity theft. This is particularly valuable for freelancers working in regions with less robust privacy protections or for those who wish to maintain a higher level of anonymity in their financial transactions. Furthermore, the decentralised nature of blockchain technology offers a high level of security; blockchain's immutable ledger ensures that once a transaction is recorded, it cannot be altered or deleted, so protecting freelancers from fraudulent chargebacks or payment disputes. In turn, this can provide gig workers with greater transparency and confidence that they will be paid for their work.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!a5sQ!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F97734752-ff30-4297-8ed0-9e7c31e3277c_1160x1254.png)

Source: [X (Twitter)](https://x.com/LaborXNews/status/1828711612691431778)

And beyond merely facilitating payments, digital money and blockchain technology enable new models for organising and managing gig work. Smart contracts and decentralised work platforms represent significant innovations and enable payments to be programmable and be executed 24/7. Smart contracts are self-executing contracts with the terms of the agreement directly written into code - they can automatically enforce the terms of a contract, such as releasing payment when a job is completed. This automation reduces the need for intermediaries and can help ensure that freelancers are paid promptly and fairly, e.g. a smart contract could be programmed to release payment to a freelancer immediately upon verification of task completion, without the need for manual approval. In addition, decentralised platforms are blockchain-based networks that operate without a central authority, so offering an alternative to traditional gig economy platforms. These platforms can provide greater transparency and fairness by allowing participants to govern the platform collectively. [LaborX](https://laborx.com/blog/new-contract-structure) is a good example of a platform used by gig workers that uses smart contracts to facilitate payments; it also processes transactions in a wide variety of digital currencies. Freelancers can benefit from lower fees, as decentralised platforms typically do not take the same level of commissions as traditional intermediaries. Moreover, the use of cryptocurrencies on these platforms ensures fast, secure payments without the risk of censorship or interference from central authorities.

However, whilst digital money offers many advantages to the gig economy, it also comes with significant challenges and risks that need to be carefully managed. One of the most prominent challenges of using cryptocurrency is its volatility; the value of cryptocurrencies can fluctuate wildly, sometimes within a matter of hours. For gig workers, this can mean that the value of their earnings could increase or, worse still, decrease significantly between the time they are paid and when they convert the earnings to their local currency - although stablecoins offer a potential solution to this problem. The regulatory landscape surrounding digital currencies is still evolving and it varies significantly between different jurisdictions; in some regions, the use of cryptocurrency is restricted or outright banned which can limit its utility for freelancers. Additionally, the tax implications of earning income in a cryptocurrency are complex and can vary widely, leading to potential legal and financial complications for gig workers. Despite the growing popularity of cryptocurrency, many gig workers and employers are still unfamiliar with how it works - certainly, the technical knowledge required to use cryptocurrency wallets, manage private keys and understand blockchain technology can be a barrier to adoption. Additionally, the infrastructure for widespread cryptocurrency use is still developing with some platforms and clients not yet equipped to handle cryptocurrency payments. Conversely, however, using digital money offers new opportunities for gig workers as they are able to monetise their labour in innovative ways. The rise of tokenisation of various assets and services creates new revenue streams for gig workers who can earn tokens for completing tasks, which can be used within specific platforms or traded on the open market. Micro-tipping or micro-payments for smaller tasks or content creation could also be included, further diversifying income sources for gig workers. Some freelancers view cryptocurrencies as an investment opportunity and, by accepting payment in cryptocurrency, gig workers can potentially benefit from the appreciation of their earnings if the value of the cryptocurrency increases over time. The gig economy itself is also evolving, with new models of work emerging that leverage blockchain and cryptocurrency. [Decentralised autonomous organisations (DAOs)](https://www.investopedia.com/tech/what-dao/) and other blockchain-based entities have the potential to create new forms of work arrangements, further integrating digital money into the fabric of the gig economy.

Essentially, digital money is playing an increasingly important role in the gig economy, offering numerous benefits such as lower transaction costs, faster cross-border payments, enhanced security and new opportunities for freelancers. However, challenges such as volatility, regulatory uncertainty and technological barriers remain significant obstacles to widespread adoption. As the gig economy continues to grow and evolve, digital currencies have the potential to become a crucial tool for freelancers and employers alike, transforming how work is conducted and compensated on a global scale. The future of the gig economy may well be intertwined with the ongoing digitisation of our economies, creating a more flexible, inclusive and efficient global labour market.
