---
title: "How blockchain's solution to power consumption can benefit AI"
description: "Artificial intelligence's impressive capabilities come with a significant environmental cost due to high energy consumption, predominantly from fossil fuels. Blockchain, once notorious for its energy issues, presents a potential solution. The shift from proof-of-work to energy efficient proof-of-stake models in blockchain technology could help optimise AI's energy usage. But, how can AI adopt blockchain's advancements to reduce its carbon footprint? And what lessons from blockchain's energy transition can be applied to AI? The convergence of these technologies might hold the key to a sustainable future for AI."
date: 2024-08-28
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/how-blockchains-solution-to-power
year: 2024
---

# How blockchain's solution to power consumption can benefit AI

Artificial intelligence's (AI) phenomenal capabilities come at a hidden cost: the immense energy drain required to train and run complex algorithms that power AI. This reliance on traditional energy sources (often fossil fuels) raises serious environmental concerns and, not too long ago, some blockchain use cases had similar issues. For a while, this was the Achilles heel of blockchain-powered assets: their enormous energy consumption. However, blockchain technology presents a potential solution because, whilst the traditional proof-of-work model used by some blockchains is energy-intensive, advancements such as proof-of-stake offer a glimmer of hope. And so, by optimising energy use within AI processes, this shift in blockchain technology could pave the way for a more sustainable future for AI. Of note, a [recent article](https://www.vox.com/climate/2024/3/28/24111721/climate-ai-tech-energy-demand-rising) by Brian Calvert raises a concerning issue, i.e., the exploding energy consumption of AI. Citing a [report from the International Energy Agency (IEA)](https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/6b2fd954-2017-408e-bf08-952fdd62118a/Electricity2024-Analysisandforecastto2026.pdf), Calvert highlights the hidden cost of our increasingly digital world. In 2022 alone, AI, data centres and cryptocurrency mining, collectively devoured nearly 2% of global energy demand - a figure equivalent to a small country's power needs. And the future looks even more alarming; the IEA [predicts a potential doubling](https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/6b2fd954-2017-408e-bf08-952fdd62118a/Electricity2024-Analysisandforecastto2026.pdf) of this energy demand by 2026, exceeding a staggering 1,000 terawatt-hours (TWh) annually. This amount of energy translates to roughly the amount of electricity Japan consumes, with the surge stemming from the immense computing power needed for AI. Furthermore, training complex models and running advanced algorithms involve massive data processing - relying heavily on data centres fuelled by traditional, often fossil fuel-based sources. And this dependence creates a significant environmental burden - as AI demand grows, so does the strain on our planet's resources (i.e., the burning of fossil fuels releases greenhouse gasses) so accelerating climate change. Hence, we must address the environmental impact of AI's hidden energy costs, from complex algorithms to everyday internet use. Undoubtedly, our digital habits have real-world consequences.

However, whilst some might see blockchain technology as a potential solution for AI's energy woes, this was not always the case. Historically, blockchain had its power problem and cryptocurrencies used to be the [focus of environmental activists](https://earthjustice.org/feature/cryptocurrency-mining-environmental-impacts), yet it would seem perceptions have been changing, in part because the traditional consensus mechanism (proof-of-work, or PoW) used by many blockchains is notorious for its high energy consumption. PoW relies on a vast network of computers to solve complex mathematical puzzles and verify transactions, requiring immense computing power and, consequently, a significant amount of energy. Several blockchain updates have aimed at reducing energy consumption, primarily by shifting from energy-intensive, PoW consensus mechanisms to more efficient proof-of-stake (PoS) systems or optimising existing protocols. Notably, Ethereum's transition from PoW to PoS in 2022, known as the Merge, drastically reduced its energy consumption by [approximately 99.95%.](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/blockchain/articles/10.3389/fbloc.2023.1151724/full#:~:text=One%20of%20PoS's%20greatest%20strengths,or%20about%2099.95%25%20less%20energy.) Similarly, Cardano's Shelley upgrade marked its transition to a PoS consensus mechanism, significantly reducing energy consumption compared to traditional PoW systems. Meanwhile, Tezos has always utilised a PoS consensus mechanism, which is inherently more energy-efficient than PoW - and subsequent upgrades have continued to optimise and enhance its efficiency. Polkadot's design includes a PoS consensus mechanism (nominated proof-of-stake or NPoS), which is more energy-efficient than PoW and these upgrades and inherent design choices help in reducing the overall energy consumption of the respective blockchain networks. And other emerging consensus mechanisms, such as proof-of-authority and proof-of-elapsed time, are being explored to further minimise blockchain's energy footprint.

Moreover, blockchain’s distributed ledger system can optimise energy usage in AI processes by ensuring transparency and efficiency in energy consumption. It enables peer-to-peer energy trading, so allowing AI systems to source power dynamically from decentralised providers, guaranteeing a steady supply. Additionally, blockchain incentivises using renewable energy for AI by offering tokens for green energy consumption. Integrating blockchain with smart grids can de-carbonise power systems by efficiently managing energy distribution, reducing reliance on fossil fuels and supporting the transition to a cleaner, decentralised energy infrastructure. And these are not the only ways AI can benefit from blockchain technology. AI companies can learn from Web3 by following the route most crypto mining companies have taken - i.e., using alternate energy sources. [EZ Blockchain](https://ezblockchain.net/) uses green power sources for Bitcoin miners ([over 65%](https://ezblockchain.net/) of their electricity is emission-free) and [OceanBit](https://www.oceanbitenergy.com/) is developing renewable energy platforms using ocean thermal sources. [According to Bennett](https://cointelegraph.com/news/bitcoin-miners-seek-alternative-energy-sources-to-cut-costs#:~:text=According%20to%20Bennett%2C%20ocean%20thermal,ocean%20water%20to%20generate%20electricity.%E2%80%9D), co-founder of OceanBit, ocean thermal energy is the largest untapped energy source on the planet: _“It’s a base load source of renewable energy, like hydro or geothermal, but uses the temperature difference in ocean water to generate electricity.”_ In addition, some Bitcoin mining companies have been utilising renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, hydro and nuclear, which are more sustainable and cost-effective in the long run - especially now that there are fewer Bitcoins to mine. Essentially, the convergence of AI and blockchain presents a unique opportunity to address the industry's energy consumption challenges. Indirectly, AI can learn from blockchain by drawing inspiration from its decentralised architecture, and AI platforms can enhance efficiency and sustainability. Organisations, such as [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/), exemplify this potential by providing a centralised hub for AI resources whilst embracing open-source principles akin to blockchain's transparency. Integrating blockchain's decentralised architecture allows AI platforms to optimise resource management, enhance collaboration and improve the sustainability credentials for operators and users of AI. Furthermore, a distributed ledger system can streamline the sharing and storage of AI models, reducing energy-intensive retraining processes and, additionally, blockchain's transparency fosters trust and accountability which is crucial for ethical AI development. This decentralisation of AI resources, enabled by blockchain, empowers a wider range of participants, stimulating innovation and preventing the concentration of power within a few dominant players. So, by safeguarding AI's present through energy efficiency and securing its future through accessibility, this synergy positions AI as a force for future positive global impact - present and future, both secured.

Consequently, while blockchain technology offers promising solutions to AI's energy consumption, several challenges persist, e.g. energy-efficient blockchain models are still under development and scalability remains a critical issue for handling large-scale AI applications. Furthermore, close collaboration between AI and blockchain developers is essential to harness the potential of this synergy. Yet, despite these hurdles, blockchain - transitioning to less energy-intensive models such as proof-of-stake - holds immense promise in addressing AI's energy footprint. By optimising energy usage, enabling peer-to-peer energy trading and incentivising renewables, blockchain can significantly contribute to sustainability and environmental goals. And so, the future of AI and blockchain integration is undoubtedly bright with the potential to reshape industries and create a more sustainable digital world.
