---
title: "Argentina's economic crisis: can digital currencies be the solution?"
description: "With severe inflation and economic instability, Argentina faces challenges similar to those of El Salvador and the Central African Republic (CAR). However, digital currencies, already widely adopted in Argentina, offer a potential solution to these economic woes. The Crecimiento Movement in Buenos Aires is leading this change, and other global case studies suggest that cryptocurrencies could improve economic stability. Managing Bitcoin's volatility and integrating it into the financial system pose significant challenges and so addressing these hurdles effectively will be crucial for Argentina to harness the full potential of digital currencies and stabilise its economy."
date: 2024-09-24
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/argentinas-economic-crisis-can-digital
year: 2024
---

# Argentina's economic crisis: can digital currencies be the solution?

Argentina is currently contending with one of the highest inflation rates globally, alongside economic stagnation and a rising poverty rate and, after more than a decade of economic struggles, the country finds itself teetering on the brink of collapse. Under President Javier Milei's new government, aggressive fiscal and monetary reforms aim to stabilise the economy, prioritising the eradication of the fiscal deficit (which reached 4.4% of GDP in 2023) and tackling [chronic inflation that has averaged 190% between 1944 and 2023](https://www.economicsobservatory.com/what-economic-challenges-does-argentina-face-today). In this dire context, there is a growing interest in digital currencies as a potential solution to transform the economy and fight decades of economic strife. So, could digital currencies help cities such as Buenos Aires address these challenges?

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!VMHp!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F2f39c841-9e86-4d5e-8bf4-9390c0aff59d_814x822.png)

Source: Teamblockchain

Although once among the wealthiest nations, Argentina now faces a severe economic downturn - for example, [$100,000 in pesos from 1995 is worth just a mere $310 today](https://www.coindesk.com/opinion/2024/08/22/from-chaos-to-crypto-the-crecimiento-movement-igniting-argentina/?utm_source=Sailthru&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=The%20Node%2C%20Aug.%2023%2C%202024&utm_term=The%20Node). And, amidst this turmoil, over a third of the population has turned to cryptocurrencies to make daily transactions, with the country now ranking 4th globally in crypto adoption. The [Crecimiento Movement in Buenos Aires](https://finance.yahoo.com/news/chaos-crypto-crecimiento-movement-igniting-203118995.html) is leading this transformation, with initiatives such as Aleph (a pop-up city) driving crypto innovation. Certainly, these efforts reflect a broader push to use digital currencies as a lifeline by offering an alternative to Argentina’s failing financial system. Furthermore, digital money presents a transformative solution for remittances, particularly for immigrant populations in Argentina. With remittance payments in Latin America [surging by 40% to $562 billion between July 2021 and June 2022](https://medium.com/@ulriklykke/the-role-of-crypto-in-remittances-revolutionizing-global-money-transfers-e67e6e03ad2d), digital money provide a faster, cheaper alternative to traditional methods; stablecoins, pegged to currencies such as the US$, are increasingly being adopted. This efficiency is also evident in Africa - in Kenya, crypto solutions have drastically reduced remittance costs and processing times. Traditional remittance fees averaging over 15% have been reduced to 8% but, by using digital money, the cost can be reduced further hence bypassing traditional banking fees. Moreover, this offers a compelling advantage in facilitating remittances, benefitting both senders and recipients, and local governments can further stimulate their economies by issuing tokens to encourage spending and investment. [Nigeria's recent digital currency launch by the CBN exemplifies this approach](https://www.pwc.com/ng/en/assets/pdf/asset-tokenisation.pdf). Certainly the potential of blockchain for asset tokenisation could mobilise idle government assets and raise funds for infrastructure projects. Nigeria's smartphone adoption rate was 36% back in 2018 but with 53 million users projected to reach 144 million by 2025; additionally, the approval of 5G is expected to boost digital technology adoption. Leveraging these advancements can drive sustainable economic growth by integrating digital assets into the local economy and blockchain technology's ability to provide transparency and immutability makes it [an effective tool in combating corruption](https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/fandd/issues/2018/03/wellisz). And by creating decentralised, tamper-proof records of public spending and contracts in Argentina, blockchain guarantees that data remains both traceable and unalterable; the technology has already [succeeded in reducing corruption in cities such as Medellín and in nations such as Spain and Peru](https://www.telefonica.com/en/communication-room/news/blockchain-can-prevent-corruption-and-improve-transparency/), highlighting its potential to increase transparency and accountability in public governance.

In addition to support economic growth, Argentina could [attract blockchain and digital asset startups by adopting crypto-friendly policies, similar to those in Portugal and Malta](https://cointelegraph.com/news/5-countries-leading-the-blockchain-adoption). By creating technological free zones and offering tax incentives, it could foster innovation and experimentation in the blockchain sector. Encouraging the use of digital money options in daily transactions, as seen in Portugal, would boost merchant adoption and this supportive environment could also draw start-ups and investors, establishing Argentina as a hub for blockchain and crypto innovation. After all, with its inflationary economy, cryptocurrencies ceetainly present a strong alternative for wealth preservation - similar to how people in [Zimbabwe and Venezuela turned to digital currencies during periods of hyperinflation](https://simpleswap.io/blog/the-use-of-crypto-in-mitigating-hyperinflation). These digital assets could provide a defence against the depreciation of the Argentine peso, potentially enabling individuals to protect their savings from losing value. Finally, Argentina's smart city projects could gain significantly from incorporating blockchain and cryptocurrencies, [drawing inspiration from cities such as Gothenburg, Chicago and Singapore](https://www.iberdrola.com/innovation/blockchain-for-smart-cities-urban-management). These urban centres utilise blockchain for improved city management, boosting mobility, energy efficiency and citizen engagement. Hence, by adopting blockchain to secure municipal governance and optimise operations, this would give Argentina the potential to foster innovation and sustainability in its urban development efforts. However, implementing cryptocurrency solutions in Argentina does present significant challenges, particularly in regulatory, technological and educational domains. [Regulatory hurdles, similar to those faced by the Indian digital rupee](https://www.forbes.com/advisor/in/investing/digital-rupee/#:~:text=With%20blockchain%20technology%2C%20the%20digital,pay%20without%20a%20middle%20man), could arise with concerns about financial stability being a key issue. The Reserve Bank of India, for instance, considers its digital rupee a legal tender but distinguishes it sharply from cryptocurrencies due to stability concerns - a stance Argentina might also adopt. Furthermore, technological obstacles present a significant challenge since Argentina would require a strong infrastructure to support the adoption of digital money. Certainly, [the difficulties faced by Nigeria with its CBDC](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/354435972_Central_Bank_Digital_Currency_in_Nigeria_Opportunities_and_Risks), the eNaira, demonstrate how technological deficiencies can stall progress. Problems such as low digital literacy, cybersecurity risks and inadequate infrastructure have also impeded the eNaira's success and acceptance, underscoring the need for thorough planning and robust systems to achieve effective digital currency implementation. Finally, education and adoption are critical; without widespread understanding and acceptance, cryptocurrency solutions will surely struggle to gain traction. Of note, a [Bank for International Settlements (BIS) paper](https://www.bis.org/publ/othp73.pdf) highlights that effective digital payment systems, such as a national CBDC, require public trust and understanding - something Argentina must foster to ensure the success of its cryptocurrency initiatives.

To draw lessons from global experiences, on September 7, 2021, [El Salvador adopted Bitcoin as legal tender](https://dergipark.org.tr/en/download/article-file/2449505) and, two years hence, the country’s experience has been mixed. The bold move by President Nayib Bukele’s government aimed to [address economic challenges and harness Bitcoin’s potential](https://technext24.com/2023/09/12/el-salvador-bitcoin-lesson-country/), however, integrating the cryptocurrency into daily transactions has proven difficult. Cash remains dominant in El Salvador, and a significant portion of the population is unbanked; the rollout faced hurdles due to limited public understanding of Bitcoin and technological barriers. Many Salvadorans used their $30 Bitcoin incentive from the Chivo Wallet only briefly before abandoning it and, despite the government's substantial Bitcoin holdings, the asset’s volatility has led to significant losses. Furthermore, in April 2022, [the Central African Republic (CAR) took a step similar to El Salvador by designating Bitcoin as legal tender](https://crypto.news/bitcoin-as-legal-tender-in-el-salvador-and-the-car-key-lessons/); this move was part of a larger blockchain initiative intended to harness digital currencies for economic growth. Nevertheless, the country’s infrastructure issues, including poor internet access and low financial literacy, hindered the project. Faced with criticism and regulatory hurdles, the initiative was reversed in March 2023. CAR's experience underscores the challenges of implementing Bitcoin in regions with substantial infrastructural and socio-economic obstacles. Interestingly, examining Argentina’s potential for cryptocurrency adoption in comparison to El Salvador and CAR highlights notable differences; whilst Argentina contends with severe inflation and financial instability akin to El Salvador and CAR, it does benefit from superior infrastructure and higher financial literacy. Argentina’s challenges would undoubtedly include managing Bitcoin’s volatility, integrating it into the current financial system and overcoming public scepticism.

Essentially, [successful cryptocurrency adoption](https://www.forbes.com/advisor/in/investing/cryptocurrency/advantages-of-cryptocurrency/) requires addressing local economic conditions, technological infrastructure and public awareness to fully leverage benefits such as financial inclusion and inflation protection. Correspondingly, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) paper on digital payments and economic growth had estimated that a 10% increase in digital payment usage corresponds with a 1% rise in GDP per capita and a 0.6% reduction in informal sector employment over two years. This research emphasises the potential economic gains from digital payment systems, reinforcing the need for thoughtful planning and implementation in cryptocurrency adoption to enhance economic growth and decrease informality. So, Argentina's dire economic situation, marked by high inflation and stagnation, has spurred a keen interest in cryptocurrencies as a potential lifeline. And, with over a third of the population already engaging with digital currencies, initiatives such as the Crecimiento Movement and projects such as Aleph in Buenos Aires highlight a growing reliance on crypto to mitigate financial instability. However, challenges such as regulatory hurdles, technological infrastructure and public education must be addressed to ensure successful implementation. By drawing lessons from global examples and leveraging its relative technological advantages, Argentina could harness cryptocurrencies to foster economic resilience and transformation amidst its ongoing financial crisis. Essentially, will the bold adoption of digital currencies be the key to Argentina's economic revival or merely another chapter in its turbulent financial saga?
