---
title: "Digital assets: accelerating adoption under the hood "
description: "Written by Martin Watkins CEO of Montis Group. More and more jurisdictions and financial institutions are adopting the use of digital assets that are powered by blockchain technology. The deployment of these tokenized assets that can trade 24/7 offer existing infrastructure providers, such as custodians, real challenges as they have to create new systems processes and procedures to embrace these new digital assets. Whilst much work has already been done, further legal and regulatory clarity is still required for the undoubted efficiencies and cost reductions of trading digital assets to be truly realised."
date: 2024-06-04
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/digital-assets-accelerating-adoption
year: 2024
---

# Digital assets: accelerating adoption under the hood 

The increasing demand for digital assets and their accelerated adoption by large financial institutions is driving a profound transformation of financial markets globally, that is only now being fully recognised. The future success or failure of global financial centres will be primarily determined by the legal certainty and regulatory regimes underpinning these new forms of financial instrument, as markets are no longer guaranteed to be concentrated in the current global centres and jurisdictions. In the European Union, for example, will the blockchain laws passed by the Luxembourg government prove more advantageous than the German Electronic Securities Act (Gesetz zur Einführung elektronischer Wertpapiere or eWpG) and the French blockchain ordinances, or will the European Commission and the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) introduce sufficient amendments to the EU Pilot Regime, such that it secures greater adoption? Furthermore, will the Monetary Authority of Singapore’s framework for digital asset networks outpace the Securities and Futures Commission and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority digital framework in the Asia Pacific region? And will the outcome of the UK general election impact the UK Digital Securities Sandbox and will changes in the US regulations speed up?

Demand is originating through the institutional investor community which is leading a wide variety of financial market participants to embrace digital securities tokens and to explore the potential of Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT). Initially, this has focused on the debt markets for bonds, as well as for ETFs, money market funds and money market instruments. Within the next ten years, all financial assets will be created natively digital and be recorded, settled and transferred using technologies such as DLT. Registrars, transfer agents and central securities depositories (CSDs) will use the same ledger for holding and maintaining their records. Indeed, they may merge into a new type of infrastructure provider. Those assets already in circulation will either transition to a tokenized form as non-natively digital securities or remain in their conventional form, but in each case, there will be an immutable, single source of truth (a golden record) of ownership and integrity of each issuance. Irrespective of which global financial centres prove most attractive, there will be continual advancements in financial and technological innovations that challenge, stretch and redefine the laws and regulations that support and shape the world of finance.

Custodians have a duty of care to their clients, holding physical or dematerialised securities and currencies as an intermediary. The inclusion of digital securities held on a permissioned public or private chain adds a new dimension to how they facilitate change of ownership (settlement), exercise rights and entitlements, i.e., proxy voting and corporate actions and process tax payments, etc. Move the digital securities into a secondary market trading environment and the interaction between custodians and market infrastructures adds several new dimensions. The full lifecycle management of digital securities can be pre-determined and either programmed into the asset as a smart contract during its creation or will be technically accessible using event streaming and workflow engines, such as Kafka and Camunda, which will drive the automatic execution of corporate events. Assets will be held in permissioned private and public networks, with access to wallets and the tokens themselves determined by whitelisting controls; both custodians and infrastructures have regulatory and legal responsibilities to fulfill. In a digital world, questions arise such as who owns and controls the wallet, how are tokens whitelisted and by whom, does a token on one blockchain retain the identical legal and economic rights when transferring onto another chain, and which instrument is the actual security? All these are factors will influence the future state, but there are other key matters being addressed “under-the-hood” today, that will have an equally strong influence on adoption and how and where markets operate in the near term. These matters relate to:

> · wallet management; and
> 
> · whitelisting tokens.

To address each matter safely, securely, efficiently and within the array of national laws and regulations, requires an innovative mindset and type of market infrastructure that provides investor protection and asset legitimacy in a digital world and aggregates (co-mingles) the three different forms of financial asset, namely natively digital and non-native digital securities tokens and conventional securities.

**Wallet management**

The digital assets themselves are assigned to digital wallets with the consensus mechanism of a particular blockchain (or hashgraph in the case of DLT, such as Hedera). Access to the wallet is via the use of private keys. Infrastructure players need unencumbered access to the wallets to mint, transfer and burn digital tokens, which suggests they need to own and hold the private keys. Custodians on the other hand are responsible for holding and safeguarding the assets of their clients and have a fiduciary responsibility for the robustness of their systems and controls to prevent loss of client assets. Technology providers such as DFNS, Ripple (formerly Metaco) and Fireblocks have been developing and supporting financial markets with technical wallet solutions for several years.

One solution is to adopt multi-party computation (MPC) where the private key is never gathered as a whole, while an alternative is to operate multi-signature (‘multi-sig’) wallets, where each party is assigned rights that relate to their roles, responsibilities and regulatory obligations. Multi-sig is a digital signing process and work continues a pace with the latest focus being on who operates the multi-sig environment and how to ensure it is blockchain protocol agnostic. The challenge is not only a technical issue. The legal and regulatory implications of ensuring that financial institutions and market infrastructures can meet their obligations efficiently and effectively is critical, particularly with the current divergence in applicable laws and rules. At the same time, they need to support and service their clients. Either way, infrastructure players and custodians need to whitelist wallets so that securities tokens can only be transferred between authorised participants and are aligning to establish the optimal way to support the management and authorised access to digital wallets on digital networks. Adoption and the interoperability of more than one solution is needed to address wallet management at scale.

**Whitelisting tokens**

Under current laws and regulations, digital securities tokens cannot be permissionless, as they cannot be transferred to anyone regardless of who they are. Digital securities tokens must be permissioned and only available to authorised parties who can buy, hold and sell the tokens in accordance with the relevant securities laws. When digital securities tokens are issued, they need to be whitelisted and allocated only to eligible investors or participants. These tokens will have controls programmed into them for minting, transferring, freezing and burning. If tokens are issued and transferred, the whitelisting verifies that that the counterparty is authorised to receive the token and has passed the relevant AML/KYC checks.

In the same way that the financial industry created the [Financial Information Exchange (FIX)](https://www.financestrategists.com/wealth-management/investment-management/financial-information-exchange-fix/#:~:text=The%20Financial%20Information%20Exchange%20\(FIX\)%20protocol%20is%20a%20series%20of,electronic%20exchange%20of%20securities%20transactions.) and adopted international standards, such as [ISO15022 and now ISO20022,](https://www.iso20022.org/welcome-iso-15022) the digital challenge is to establish the appropriate controls (and standards) for permissioned tokens. The two main types of controls are:

> · regulatory controls, i.e., AML/KYC, sanction checks and blacklists
> 
> · security controls, i.e., investor type (eligibility), jurisdiction/location and investment limits.

The industry is collaborating around a few initiatives such as the [ERC3643 Association](https://www.erc3643.org/) and a solution cannot come too soon. Recognising the vital role that participants such as custodians and market infrastructures play in providing stability, certainty, resilience and settlement finality to domestic and international financial markets, it is important that infrastructure players adapt to support financial innovation and technical advancements in an increasingly demanding digital landscape. Their role is changing with the advent of new technology and financial innovation to give the same comfort to financial markets as they have been able to benefit from in the past. The functions will still be legally required, but in a digital ecosystem. Change is inevitable - however, the winners and losers, the disintermediated and the industry formers have yet to be decided, alongside the CBDC, deposit tokens, stablecoins conundrum of whose money is it anyway, and how do we balance decentralization with control and prudential oversight. While the future state is being driven by new laws and regulations, the work “under-the-hood” is fulfilling a key role in accelerating the adoption of digital securities.
