---
title: "What is programmable money? A guide to CBDCs and stablecoins"
description: "Programmable money is revolutionising financial transactions by embedding rules directly within digital currencies, utilising blockchain technology and smart contracts to enhance security, control and efficiency. Central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) can impact financial stability and risk transfer, whilst stablecoins offer stable value but face both regulatory and technical challenges. The need for digital money is underscored by its potential to drive economic growth, financial inclusion and efficiency, especially for SMEs. Real-world applications, including energy and mobile payments, illustrate programmable money’s cost benefits and practical uses."
date: 2024-08-13
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/what-is-programmable-money-a-guide
year: 2024
---

# What is programmable money? A guide to CBDCs and stablecoins

As technology continues to advance and digital connectivity grows, the realm of financial transactions is experiencing swift transformation. Innovative technology such as blockchain and smart contracts are making money and payment systems more intelligent by integrating logical conditions into digital money and transactions. Meanwhile, programmable money represents a shift in financial transactions by embedding operational rules directly into the currency, thus influencing how it can be utilised. This development offers significant benefits in the digital economy, such as improved security, control and efficiency. So, what is programmable money? [Programmable money](https://www.finextra.com/blogposting/25580/how-programmable-money-will-revolutionize-the-financial-world#:~:text=It%20is%20a%20monetary%20system,contracts%20constructed%20on%20the%20blockchain) represents a significant leap in financial technology by embedding rules directly within the store of value; unlike programmable payments, which may involve external conditions, programmable money is self-contained, carrying both the programming logic and the value. This means that when programmable money is transferred, it includes these embedded rules, ensuring predefined conditions are met. In essence, [this feature introduces new levels of control and security](https://www.jpmorgan.com/onyx/programmable-payments-purpose-bound-money), allowing issuers to prescribe usage, transferees, spending limits and even termination dates.

Programmable money is typically powered by a blockchain and uses smart contracts, so integrating logic-based conditions and it can hence enhance user experiences, transparency, efficiency and accessibility of financial services. However, this system differs from traditional digital currency models where value and logic are stored separately, often requiring additional technology systems to connect them. Furthermore, [CBDCs represent a significant advancement](https://www.ebf.eu/ebf-media-centre/copenhagen-economics-study-on-the-impact-of-a-digital-euro-on-financial-stability-and-consumer-welfare/) in digital payment methods, aligning with the objective of enhancing European strategic autonomy in payments; the banking industry in the EU supports developing new digital currencies to foster a resilient and competitive payments and digital assets ecosystem in Europe. This certainly means that a well-designed digital euro could effectively meet evolving payment needs. Retail CBDCs, unlike wholesale ones, introduce complexities that require balancing impacts on the economy and financial intermediation - e.g. the introduction of a digital euro with a holding limit of €3,000 could lead to an outflow of up to €739 billion in bank deposits, equivalent to 10% of the total household deposit base and 3% of total bank liabilities. Furthermore, a lower holding limit, such as €500, could reduce the deposit loss to €139 billion (an 81% decrease), highlighting the significance of holding limit adjustments. However, the issuance of retail CBDCs involves transferring risk from commercial banks to the central bank which, in turn, could lead to commercial banks increasing interest rates to attract deposits. The Copenhagen Economics study found that a retail CBDC could [reduce EU GDP by up to 0.34% p.a.](https://www.ebf.eu/ebf-media-centre/copenhagen-economics-study-on-the-impact-of-a-digital-euro-on-financial-stability-and-consumer-welfare/) To mitigate this risk transfer, mechanisms such as unattractive interest rates, quantity ceilings or non-convertibility of cash and reserves into CBDCs could be employed although these measures could potentially discourage CBDC usage as a medium of exchange, potentially undermining their intended benefits.

[Stablecoins have emerged as a key innovation](https://www.financemagnates.com/cryptocurrency/coins/stablecoins-and-financial-inclusion-use-cases-and-challenges-in-2023/) aimed at maintaining a stable value relative to traditional fiat currencies or assets, although not all stablecoins are 100% backed by the assets that they track. They are generally divided into three types: **fiat-collateralised, crypto-collateralised** , and **non-collateralised**. Fiat-collateralised stablecoins are backed by reserves of traditional currencies such as the US dollar or Euro; crypto-collateralised stablecoins are supported by other cryptocurrencies; and non-collateralised stablecoins, or algorithmic stablecoins, use algorithms to manage their supply and demand. Moreover, stablecoins present various use cases that enhance financial inclusion. They can simplify cross-border remittances by reducing cost and expediting transactions, support microtransactions and provide a stable value for savings. For individuals who are excluded from traditional banking services, stablecoins can also enable access to financial services such as loans and insurance. However, stablecoins face several challenges, including regulatory ambiguity, technical difficulties and adoption issues. Fiat-collateralised stablecoins depend on trust in external parties, crypto-collateralised stablecoins are exposed to price volatility and algorithmic stablecoins deal with transparency issues and vulnerability to cyberattacks. And tackling these challenges is crucial in order for stablecoins to fully support financial inclusion. Furthermore, the issuance of retail central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) also presents challenges, especially regarding [credit risk transfer from commercial banks to central banks](https://sjes.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s41937-024-00124-3). In order to mitigate this risk, central banks might set unattractive interest rates on CBDCs, impose quantity ceilings or restrict the direct conversion of cash and reserves into CBDCs. Balancing these measures is crucial because excessive restrictions could limit CBDCs’ attractiveness as a practical payment tool, potentially undermining their role in providing a resilient payment system. Hence, careful design and policy strategies are essential - unattractive interest rates can deter excessive demand, whilst quantity ceilings cap potential risk and limiting convertibility helps manage the shift from bank deposits to CBDCs. Yet, if CBDCs are used mainly as a store of value rather than for transactions, they may fall short of enhancing monetary policy effectiveness and payment system resilience. Therefore, a nuanced approach is needed to ensure CBDCs serve as an effective medium of exchange whilst managing associated risks.

So, do we need digital money? [The emergence of digital currencies](https://blogs.worldbank.org/en/voices/fast-payments-offer-potential-faster-digital-financial-inclusion-and-faster-growth), especially through accelerated-payment systems, signifies a major transformation in the financial industry. These innovations improve transaction efficiency and foster broader economic development. Digital money is important for offering faster and more efficient payment options whilst extending access to financial services. And, as the [Qatar Central Bank](https://www.cryptopolitan.com/qatar-central-bank-explains-its-cbdc-project/) _explained as it launched its CBDC project: “Their implementation provides for a new form of financial market infrastructure (FMI) to be deployed which may improve efficiency and reduce intermediation of financial markets.”_ Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), which globally number around [400 million, account for over 95% of firms and 60%-70% of employment](https://globalnaps.org/issue/small-medium-enterprises-smes/#:~:text=The%20approximately%20400%20million%20SMEs,60%25%2D70%25%20of%20employment.) and we have seen new forms of payment systems being established in other jurisdictions. In Brazil, the fast-payment system Pix, introduced in 2020, has become a cornerstone of daily transactions with over [150 million user](https://www.judopay.com/blog/pix-revolution-the-surge-of-instant-transactions-in-brazil)s and widespread adoption among SMEs. In Kenya as far back as “[2021, over 60 percent](https://www.statista.com/statistics/1249097/usage-of-mobile-money-by-micro-and-small-businesses-in-kenya/) _of micro and small enterprises in Kenya used mobile money for business transactions.”_ Certainly, these types of payment systems have improved efficiency which has led to significant cost savings and increased transaction volumes, boosting economic activity. For example, Thailand's PromptPay is expected to contribute [2.08% to the GDP by 2026](https://go.aciworldwide.com/Global-Payments-Report-Thailand.html), highlighting the potential economic impact of fast-payment systems. Presumably, these innovations in other jurisdictions have encouraged [the Bank of England’s approach to innovation in money and payments](https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/Paper/2024/dp/the-boes-approach-to-innovation-in-money-and-payments?sf196480525=1) __ discussion paper on 30th July 2024 to be issued?__ Meanwhile, it would seem the Bank of England is looking at running a series of experiments to explore the real benefits and identify use cases, and for industry to innovate so as to have new rails and infrastructure for all forms of digital money.

The capability of real-time payments to enable 24/7 fund transfers is vital for advancing financial inclusion, especially in less developed regions, and the [World Bank](https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/globalfindex) estimates approximately 25% of the adults globally do not have access to a bank or mobile-phone account. But instantaneous payments can address these issues, aiding in poverty reduction and enhancing economic inclusion. Moreover, digital currencies enable efficient government payments, improve remittance services by lowering costs and accelerate financial system digitalisation. For example, [Pakistan's RAAST initiative](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2024/07/digital-public-infrastructure-is-transforming-lives-in-pakistan/) supports social safety programs, enhancing access for millions. Globally, whilst around 100 jurisdictions have adopted fast payments, many are still evolving their systems so accelerating these efforts and fostering international cooperation are crucial to fully leveraging digital money's potential to drive economic growth and financial inclusion. If SMEs could benefit from delivery vs payment (DvP) with T0 settlement times, the velocity of money would increase, whereby improving productivity and stimulating economic growth. Digital currencies, including central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) and stablecoins, hold significant promise for enhancing financial inclusion. Currently, [93% of central banks surveyed by the Bank for International Settlements are exploring CBDCs](https://coinmarketcap.com/view/stablecoin/), with many in sub-Saharan Africa actively researching or developing them. The Bahamas, Eastern Caribbean, Jamaica and Nigeria have all issued retail CBDCs, although adoption challenges persist. For example, the Bahamas’ SandDollar represents a small fraction of the currency in circulation, with registered wallets covering about 25% of the population.

[If well-designed, CBDCs can improve financial inclusion by lowering barriers to access](https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/financialinclusion/publication/digital-financial-inclusion#:~:text=The%20benefits%20of%20digital%20financial,%2C%20insurance%2C%20securities%2C%20etc) and they can reduce identity management requirements in low-risk contexts, potentially allowing digital currency use without traditional bank accounts or minimum balances. Furthermore, by reducing transaction costs, CBDCs can make financial services more affordable, offering transformative benefits for the 2.5 billion adults who rely solely on cash due to limited access to formal financial services. [Stablecoins are instrumental in enhancing financial inclusion](https://www.financemagnates.com/cryptocurrency/coins/stablecoins-and-financial-inclusion-use-cases-and-challenges-in-2023/) \- they streamline cross-border remittances with lower fees and faster transaction times. For example, [remittance costs using stablecoins can be reduced](https://www.checkout.com/blog/what-are-stablecoins-and-how-do-they-work) to approximately 1% or less, compared to an average of 6.25% with traditional methods. They support microtransactions and provide a store of value for those without traditional savings accounts. Furthermore, stablecoins facilitate small payments without requiring conventional banking infrastructure, benefiting those small business owners and entrepreneurs in economies reliant on cash. Meanwhile, stablecoins provide a valuable savings alternative for individuals without access to conventional savings accounts, so helping to foster financial stability over the long term. By mid-2024, the [total market value of stablecoins has surged to over $160 billion](https://coinmarketcap.com/view/stablecoin/), indicating their rising adoption and relevance. Two examples of real-world applications and cost benefits are:

> · **energy payments**

[Understanding the cost impact of prepayment meters versus direct debit for household energy bills](https://orbitenergy.co.uk/guides/prepayment-meter-vs-direct-debit-which-is-better) is crucial when making a decision. Prepayment meters require payment in advance for energy, operating similarly to a pay-as-you-go system. This can be advantageous for budget control as users only use what they have already paid for. However, prepayment meters generally feature higher unit rates than direct debit options, which may result in higher total costs.

> · **mobile ‘phone payments**

When comparing mobile ‘phone plans, [pay-monthly contracts and pay-as-you-go (PAYG) options offer distinct benefits and cost implications](https://www.nimblefins.co.uk/mobile-phone-contract-better-pay-you-go#:~:text=If%20you're%20a%20light,cost%20you%20more%20per%20GB). Pay-monthly deals typically bundle a new handset with data, minutes and texts into a fixed monthly payment. This arrangement often includes additional perks, such as streaming services or discounts, but can be more expensive overall due to interest on the handset and potential contract fees. Credit checks are usually required, which might pose challenges for individuals with poor credit history. Conversely, PAYG plans let users pay solely for the data, minutes and texts they consume, without needing a contract or undergoing a credit check. This flexibility is perfect for infrequent users, as it eliminates long-term commitments and provides straightforward access. However, PAYG generally incurs [higher costs per unit](https://network-telecom.com/contract-vs-pay-as-you-go-phone-plans-pros-cons/) of usage compared to contract plans, and users must actively monitor their balance.

With this said, programmable money is reshaping financial transactions by introducing advanced features that offer substantial benefits in everyday payment systems. By embedding smart contracts and automated rules into digital currencies, programmable money has the potential to revolutionise how we handle billing, optimise costs and provide greater flexibility. From streamlining energy payments to refining mobile phone plans, programmable money stands to deliver practical improvements that drive both economic and consumer benefits. Overall, programmable money represents a transformative leap in financial technology, integrating programmable logic directly within digital currencies to redefine the future of transactions. By embedding rules and conditions into the currency itself, programmable money enhances security, control and efficiency, setting it apart from traditional digital models. Central bank digital currencies and stablecoins exemplify this innovation, offering significant benefits such as financial inclusion and streamlined payments. And, despite challenges such as risk transfer and regulatory hurdles, the continued development of programmable money promises to drive substantial economic growth and inclusivity. As digital money evolves, its potential to reshape financial landscapes and improve transaction efficiency becomes increasingly clear.
