---
title: "Decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs): pioneering the future of blockchain entities "
description: "Written by Clair Wemers Advocaat CMS. Decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs) are digital entities operating on decentralized ledger technology, where code, rather than humans, makes decisions. Linking a DAO to a legal entity provides legal status and liability protection, crucial for contracts, employment and financial operations. Without this linkage, DAO-members risk personal liability for the DAO’s debts. Therefore, DAO-entrepreneurs are advised to incorporate legal entities and include clear legal frameworks in their smart contract to ensure secure and legally sound operations."
date: 2024-06-25
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/decentralized-autonomous-organizations
year: 2024
---

# Decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs): pioneering the future of blockchain entities 

Decentralized ledger technology, such as blockchain, enables the establishment of digital organizations that operate entirely or partially on code within a decentralized network. These entities are known as DAOs. The definition of a DAO has been subject to much debate. One can start the journey on defining a DAO with the view of Vitalik Buterin. As one of the co-founders of the Ethereum blockchain, Buterin describes a DAO in the [Ethereum Whitepaper in 2014](https://ethereum.org/en/whitepaper/) as a virtual entity that has a certain set of members or shareholders which have the right to spend the entity's funds and modify its code. In the terminology guide on the Ethereum Blog, Buterin describes the idea of a DAO as “ _… an entity that lives on the internet and exists autonomously, but also heavily relies on hiring individuals to perform certain tasks that the automaton itself cannot do_.” He highlights a few elements of a DAO, i.e. a DAO contains some kind of internal property that is valuable in some way, and it has the ability to use that property as a mechanism for rewarding certain activities. Furthermore, he highlights that the word _[“autonomous](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/05/06/daos-dacs-das-and-more-an-incomplete-terminology-guide\).)_[”, not humans are the ones making the decisions,](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/05/06/daos-dacs-das-and-more-an-incomplete-terminology-guide\).) but a DAO is something that, in some fashion, makes decisions for itself.

[Rikken et al analysed 1,635 DAOs](https://pure.tudelft.nl/ws/portalfiles/portal/159401180/1_s2.0_S2096720923000180_main.pdf) and a wide range of existing DAO definitions. They assessed the key functionalities for each of the DAO. The assessed various key functions include the storage of links to information, chat functions, agent, allocations, addresses, dot votings, rewards and projects. However, they found that there are two key functionalities that are consistently shares by almost all DAOs. The first one is the “ _storage and transfer of value functionality_.” The vast majority of DAOs Rikken et al analysed have the ability to store and transact value as a result of a certain trigger, being a decision outcome or incoming transaction, in the form of cryptocurrencies or tokens. The second key functionality is the “ _trusted notary functionality”_. The DAOs observed by Rikken et al almost all have the functionality to organize, track, execute and archive votings. They found that this trusted notary function is often the trigger for the transaction of value. Based on the characteristics and the wide range of existing DAO definitions, they formulated the [following comprehensive definition](https://ssrn.com/abstract=3989559%20or%20http:/dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3989559.): “ _A DAO is a system in which storage and transaction of value and notary (voting) functions can be designed, organized, recorded, and archived and where data and actions are recorded and autonomously executed in a decentralized way_.” By the end of Q3 2022, the number had risen to just over 12,000 projects. According to deepdao.io, as of June 2024, DAOs manage more than $26.7 billion in assets. One explanation for the rapid increase is the ease of creating DAOs today as, before 2018, coding was required to establish a DAO.

However, since the introduction of parameterized [DAO deployment platforms in 2018](https://doi.org/10.1080/25741292.2023.2270220), DAOs can now be created by configuring a few parameters, which can then be automatically deployed.__ There is no standard DAO, they exist in various forms. DAOs can mirror traditional organizations and can have various governance models, incentive plans and purposes. They can generate profit or not and be active in various fields. In practice, many DAOs are very similar to traditional organizations. Traditional organizations exist in the form of a legal entity. In the Netherlands, but also in other countries, the laws provide for a limited set of legal entities (_rechtsvormen_), like a limited, partnership or foundation. The applicable laws provide for the requirements and characteristics of these legal entities. The existing legal entities can be suitable for DAOs. Linking a DAO to a legal entity can have advantages. In the event that a DAO is linked to a legal entity, it will have a legal status and will have the capacity to sign contracts with third parties, enter into employment agreements, open bank accounts etc. Furthermore, such DAO will benefit from the liability protection of the entity to which it is linked. Setting up a DAO in the Netherlands, but also in other jurisdictions, without linking the DAO to a legal entity could impose legal risks. For example, if multiple natural persons or legal entities bring together capital or labour with the collective aim of generating profits, then this may - under circumstances - qualify as a partnership (_maatschap_). As a result, the participants of the DAO will qualify by law as partners of the partnership and will be, by law, liable for all debts of the DAO. That is why the use of DAOs that are not linked to legal entities poses significant risks to their members or participants. Members or participants of such DAOs may be fully liable for the debts of their DAOs even if they own only a small fraction of the total membership interest. A significant disadvantage of DAOs not connected to legal entities is the lack of legal clarity about which laws govern them. Since they lack registration with a Chamber of Commerce, traditional methods for determining applicable laws could be ineffective. Identifying the relevant laws may require a complex conflict of laws assessment, involving numerous jurisdictions, especially since DAO members are often globally dispersed. This could result in lengthy and uncertain procedures.

To avoid complex issues or undesired legal consequences, it is advisable to link a DAO to a legal entity. There are several appropriate legal forms for different types of DAOs. Choosing a legal entity for a DAO highly depends on the goal and the desired functionalities of the DAO (fully or partly decentralized or autonomous). For a comprehensive description of relevant legal entities in the Netherlands, please refer to the [whitepaper on DAOs](https://dutchblockchaincoalition.org/assets/images/default/Whitepaper-DBC-Corporate-law-aspects-DAO.pdf) of the Dutch Blockchain Coalition. While there is currently no one-size-fits-all legal entity for a DAO, the existing legal entities in the Netherlands provide enough flexibility for most DAOs. Additionally, it is useful to include a clear choice of law and forum clause within the smart contract. This description should specify which court or forum will handle any potential conflicts, ensuring that all parties have a clear understanding of the legal framework that will govern their interactions and any disputes that may arise. Given these legal risks, it is advisable for DAO-entrepreneurs to carefully weigh the benefits of incorporating a legal entity before initiating a DAO. This proactive approach helps mitigate potential liabilities. Furthermore, it is essential to include a clear choice of law and forum clause within the smart contract. These measures not only protect DAO-entrepreneurs and their participants but also ensure the DAO’s operations are more secure and legally sound.

DAOs are increasingly being used in many jurisdictions. However, the legal landscape for DAOs is complex. Linking a DAO to a legal entity can provide significant advantages, including legal status, liability protection and the ability to enter into contracts and open bank accounts. Without such a link, DAO members could face personal liability for the organization’s debts. This legal ambiguity and the potential risks underscore the importance for DAO-entrepreneurs to incorporate legal entities and establish clear legal frameworks within their smart contracts. Doing so not only mitigates liabilities but also ensures the DAO operates within a defined legal structure, providing security and clarity for all participants. This dual focus on technological innovation and legal prudence positions DAOs as a compelling model for the future of organizational governance.
