---
title: "Cryptocurrency adoption by major corporations "
description: "Major organisations' embracing of cryptocurrencies has grown to be a noteworthy trend, indicating a move towards digital currencies' wider acceptability. Given that Bitcoin ETFs accounted for 26% of BlackRock's 2024 inflows and 56% of Fidelity’s net inflows in the first half of 2024 how many other asset managers are questioning their cryptocurrency strategy. As an alternative form of payment, cryptocurrencies are not only challenging the way goods and services are paid for but encouraging a deeper rethinking of value, ownership and financial interaction in the digital age."
date: 2024-07-31
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/cryptocurrency-adoption-by-major
year: 2024
---

# Cryptocurrency adoption by major corporations 

The interest in cryptocurrencies has arguably been fuelled by FOMO (fear of missing out), but its widescale adoption has been held back by a lack of legislative and regulatory clarity, technological developments and scepticism. The first cryptocurrency, Bitcoin, was created as a decentralised substitute for conventional money. However, as its potential as a hedge against inflation and a store of wealth became more apparent, big businesses and institutions (in addition to individual investors) started to take notice. Large enterprises and established financial institutions viewed cryptocurrency with caution and mistrust at first but, as the market developed and regulations became clearer, more financial institutions have begun to realise how advantageous it is to use digital assets. Elon Musk's, Tesla, the world's largest electric car company, gained notoriety in 2021 when it revealed a sizeable investment in Bitcoin and began using the digital currency as payment for its cars. This action not only gave Bitcoin status as a payment method in the US, but also set off a chain reaction that encouraged other businesses to consider incorporating cryptocurrency into their daily operations. Indeed, as this link confirms, there are over [250 companies](https://bitpay.com/directory/) that accept cryptocurrencies as a form of payment. Meanwhile, global asset managers have enjoyed massive inflows of Bitcoin into the BTC ETFs they have launched this year. Indeed, Bitcoin ETFs accounted for [26% of BlackRock's 2024 inflows and 56% of Fidelity’s](https://cointelegraph.com/news/bitcoin-etf-blackrock-fidelity-bitcoin-etfs-account-large-share-total-flows) in the first half on 2024. Presumably, the Board of the world’s biggest asset manager, BlackRock, is supportive of crypto currencies - having seen how successful its BTC ETF has been and also the fact that the BlackRock USD Institutional Digital Liquidity Fund (BUIDL) is already worth over $500million. BlackRock’s Board includes the CEO‘s of Saudi Aramco, Royal Bank of Canada, Verizon, Cisco, Estee Lauder and General Electric. So, are these board members encouraging their own firms to review how they, too, engage with cryptocurrencies?

**BlackRock’s board**

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!sy0J!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F8f7a2e76-ebf7-4e72-8c92-5b559895c242_998x1048.png)

Source: [X](https://x.com/search?q=global%20corporations%20using%20crypto&src=typed_query&f=top)

In addition, MicroStrategy holds over [214,000 Bitcoins](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-03-19/microstrategy-owns-about-1-of-all-bitcoin-with-latest-purchase-mstr?embedded-checkout=true), using them primary as a treasury reserve asset.

MicroStrategy's approach underscores the potential for cryptocurrencies to serve as a hedge against inflation and currency devaluation. Block, led by Twitter co-founder, Jack Dorsey, invests [10% of its profit into Bitcoin](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-05-02/block-to-flip-10-of-bitcoin-profit-into-bitcoin-investments) and integrates crypto transactions through its Cash App, making it easier for everyday users to buy and sell Bitcoin, so promoting wider adoption. [PayPal](https://www.paypal.com/uk/cshelp/article/how-do-i-buy-cryptocurrency-on-paypal-help567) allows users to buy, hold and sell cryptocurrencies directly from their PayPal accounts whereby making it more convenient for a broad range of consumers to engage with cryptocurrencies and hence, driving mainstream acceptance. Block and PayPal are examples of the role Fintech companies can play in bridging the gap between traditional finance and the crypto world. In terms of larger global firms, Microsoft has been accepting Bitcoin for its online Xbox store since [2014.](https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/paypal-and-microsoft-adopt-cryptocurrencies%3A-what-this-means-for-the-future#:~:text=Microsoft%20\(MSFT\)%20opened%20up%20to,Xbox%2C%20or%20Windows%20operating%20system.) Additionally, Microsoft Azure offers blockchain-as-a-service (BaaS) solutions and IBM has explored cryptocurrency, having been a pioneer in blockchain technology. Indeed, in [2020](https://www.coindesk.com/business/2022/02/18/inside-ibms-fast-growing-crypto-custody-play/) it first started exploring crypto custody solutions with its IBM Blockchain platform helping businesses create and manage blockchain networks. Furthermore, IBM's initiatives have paved the way for enterprise blockchain adoption, providing scalable solutions for supply chain, finance and healthcare industries. And, IBM's focus on blockchain rather than direct cryptocurrency adoption underscores the broader potential of blockchain technology beyond digital currencies. [Visa and Mastercard](https://koinly.io/blog/best-crypto-debit-card/) have partnered with cryptocurrency platforms to allow the use of digital currencies through their networks, so enabling consumers to, in effect, be able to buy goods and services using cryptocurrencies in over [46 million merchants in 160+jurisdictions](https://www.visa.co.uk/dam/VCOM/download/corporate/media/visanet-technology/aboutvisafactsheet.pdf). Finally, through a partnership with [Bakkt, Starbucks](https://decrypt.co/216419/former-starbucks-bitcoin-partner-bakkt-says-its-running-out-of-cash) has enabled customers to reload their Starbucks cards using Bitcoin - this integration has enabled consumers to use their cryptocurrency holdings in a mainstream retail environment.**** Starbucks' adoption showcases how consumer-facing businesses can leverage cryptocurrencies to provide more payment options and enhance customer experience.

**Insights and trends**

> · **regulatory environment** \- the regulatory landscape for cryptocurrencies varies significantly across regions, impacting how and to what extent corporations can adopt and use digital currencies. Corporations need to navigate complex regulations to avoid legal pitfalls.
> 
> · **market volatility** \- cryptocurrencies are known for their price volatility. Corporations must be prepared to handle potential financial risks associated with holding digital assets.
> 
> · **environmental concerns** \- the environmental impact of cryptocurrency mining, particularly Bitcoin, has prompted some companies to reconsider their involvement or push for more sustainable practices.
> 
> · **technological integration** \- integrating cryptocurrency transactions into existing payment systems requires significant technological infrastructure. Companies must invest in secure and efficient systems to handle digital currencies.
> 
> · **consumer demand** \- increasing consumer interest in cryptocurrencies drives corporations to adopt digital currencies to meet market demand and stay competitive.
> 
> · **long-term strategy** \- for many companies, adopting cryptocurrencies is part of a broader long-term strategy to innovate and diversify their financial practices. This can include exploring blockchain technology for other applications such as supply chain management and smart contracts.
> 
> · **security concerns** \- security is paramount in cryptocurrency transactions. Corporations must invest in robust cybersecurity measures to protect against hacks and fraud. The adoption of multi-signature wallets and hardware wallets can mitigate some of these risks.
> 
> · **education and awareness** \- educating both employees and customers about cryptocurrencies is crucial; misunderstandings and lack of knowledge can hinder adoption. Corporations need to provide clear, accessible information about the benefits and risks of using digital currencies.
> 
> · **partnerships and ecosystems** \- collaborating with fintech companies, blockchain developers and other tech firms can enhance a corporation's ability to integrate cryptocurrencies effectively. Building ecosystems around blockchain and cryptocurrency can drive innovation and adoption.
> 
> · **corporate social responsibility (CSR)** \- with growing environmental concerns, companies adopting cryptocurrencies may face scrutiny over their environmental impact. Adopting greener cryptocurrencies or investing in sustainable mining practices can align crypto adoption with CSR goals.

However, what does the future potentially hold when it comes to crypto adoption by major corporations? Certainly, there is a growing awareness and belief that digital/programmable money in the form of CBDC, stablecoins and tokenised deposits will play a significant role initially at a wholesale level for institutions and then, in time, for retail payments. Already we are seeing (as [PwC illustrates in its annual CBDC and stablecoin review](https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/financial-services/pdf/pwc-global-cbdc-index-and-stablecoin-overview-2023.pdf)), governments and large corporations, such as banks, issuing digital payment options. Another sector to keep an eye on is decentralised finance (DeFi), which offers innovative financial products such as decentralised lending, staking and yield farming. There is a possibility that corporations might integrate DeFi services to enhance their financial offerings and improve capital efficiency as well as using DeFi to reach the [1.4billion citizens](https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/globalfindex/interactive-executive-summary-visualization) in the world who are unbanked. CBDCs, stablecoins and tokenised assets hint at a digital money future. So, how will these transform financial services and transactions? Certainly, non-fungible tokens (NFTs) have opened new avenues for digital ownership and intellectual property, with good examples being luxury car brands such as [Porsche and Mercedez Benz](https://www.gq-magazine.co.uk/lifestyle/article/automotive-nfts-porsche-mercedes-benz). And, as [Rolling Stones magazine](https://www.rollingstone.com/culture-council/articles/nfts-disrupting-entertainment-industrys-traditional-models-1234806581/) has reported, companies in the creative and entertainment industries are exploring NFTs for new revenue streams and audience engagement. Cryptocurrencies can also be harnessed to simplify and reduce the cost of cross-border transactions as, typically, using traditional service providers can cost from [3.6% to 13.9%](https://cryptoforinnovation.org/crypto-and-remittances-overview-challenges-and-progress-ahead/#:~:text=Crypto%20can%20help%20reduce%20the,the%20costs%20and%20times%20involved.) to make an overseas payment. Finally, there is the ongoing challenge privacy when making a payment; although tokenisation is not new, [Visa Token Service (VTS](https://usa.visa.com/partner-with-us/payment-technology/visa-tokenization.html#:~:text=Visa%20Token%20Service%20\(VTS\),millions%20of%20customers%20every%20day.)) reminds us: “ _VTS is the foundational platform for global tokenization. By substituting Visa card numbers with tokens, VTS enables richer, more secure digital payment experiences for millions of customers every day._ ”

So, the ongoing adoption of cryptocurrencies by major corporations is reshaping the financial landscape with each corporation's approach providing valuable lessons on the benefits and challenges of integrating digital currencies. As the regulatory environment evolves and technology advances, we can certainly expect more innovative uses of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technologies across various industries. Corporations must focus on security, compliance and technological infrastructure so how will ongoing regulatory dialogues shape the future of cryptocurrency adoption? This paradigm shift not only challenges traditional financial systems but also opens up new avenues for economic growth and inclusion, reflecting a deeper rethinking of value, ownership and financial interaction in the digital age. Ultimately, will this paradigm shift foster economic growth and inclusion, challenging traditional financial systems and payments, so redefining value and ownership in the digital age?
