---
title: "Blockchain and economic resilience: enhancing stability in times of crisis (Part 1) "
description: "Blockchain-powered platforms offer the potential to enhance economic resilience by improving the transparency, security and efficiency of financial systems, supply chains and digital identity. DeFi and CBDCs offer alternatives to traditional financial systems whilst blockchain-based supply chains provide real-time tracking and automation. However, questions remain about the risks, such as over-reliance on decentralised systems and the security of digital identities, sparking debate on whether blockchain is the ultimate solution or a new set of challenges."
date: 2024-09-17
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/blockchain-and-economic-resilience
year: 2024
---

# Blockchain and economic resilience: enhancing stability in times of crisis (Part 1) 

Economic resilience refers to the ability of an economy to withstand and recover from shocks, such as financial crises, natural disasters or other disruptions. Blockchain technology can play a crucial role in enhancing economic resilience by providing a more secure, transparent and efficient framework for various economic activities. Increasingly, the decentralised nature of blockchain technology is being recognised as a way to potentially improve the resilience of financial markets’ infrastructure as opposed to being over-reliant on a handful of centralised entities such as Euroclear, DTCC and Clearstream; certainly, if any one of these three organisations were compromised it could severely undermine the working capabilities and thus confidence in financial markets.

Financial systems are the backbone of any economy and their stability is crucial for economic resilience. Blockchain technology can enhance the resilience of financial systems in several ways, one example of which is [DeFi](https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/definition/decentralized-finance-DeFi), which refers to a system of financial services that operate on decentralised blockchain networks without the need for traditional financial intermediaries i.e., banks. By leveraging smart contracts, DeFi platforms can offer services such as lending, borrowing, trading and insurance in a more transparent and accessible manner. During times of crisis, when traditional financial institutions may become unstable or inaccessible, DeFi can provide an alternative means of financial services so helping to maintain economic activity and stability. Blockchain technology can streamline cross-border payments by reducing the need for intermediaries, lowering transaction costs and speeding up the settlement process. Additionally, in these periods of adversity when traditional payment channels may be disrupted, blockchain-based payment systems can ensure the continued flow of remittances and international trade, which are vital for economic stability. [CBDCs](https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/research-reports-impact-and-evaluation/research-and-reports/technology-and-innovation/tech-horizons-report/central-bank-digital-currencies-cbdcs/#:~:text=A%20central%20bank%20digital%20currency,by%20the%20Bank%20of%20England.) are a type of digital money issued by central banks and typically powered by blockchain technology. CBDCs can enhance the resilience of the financial system by providing a secure and efficient means of payment, reducing reliance on physical cash and enabling more effective monetary policy transmission. Supply chains are critical to the functioning of the global economy, and disruptions to supply chains can have far-reaching consequences. In a world that increasingly relies on ‘[just in time production](https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/definition/just-in-time-manufacturing-JIT-manufacturing#:~:text=Just%2Din%2Dtime%20manufacturing%20\(JIT%20manufacturing\)%20is%20a,and%20speed%20up%20product%20delivery.)’ as a way to improve efficiency, supply chain resilience is critical. For example, [by partnering with IBM and leveraging the Hyperledger Fabric blockchain, Walmart has created a system that allows it to track the provenance of products (such as fresh produce), from farm to shelf.](https://www.hyperledger.org/case-studies/walmart-case-study)

Meanwhile, the supply chain challenges for semiconductor chips have created major problems for many manufacturers, with car plants being obliged to work less hours (as well as [inflationary pressures](https://www.stlouisfed.org/on-the-economy/2022/may/did-computer-chip-shortage-affect-inflation)) as prices rose. However, blockchain technology can enhance supply chain resilience by providing greater transparency, traceability and efficiency; it allows for the tracking of goods and materials at every stage of the supply chain, from production to delivery. This transparency ensures that all participants in the supply chain have access to accurate and up-to-date information, so reducing the risk of fraud, counterfeiting and inefficiencies. Furthermore, in times of crisis, such as natural disasters or pandemics, blockchain can help identify and address supply chain bottlenecks, ensuring the continued flow of essential goods and services. By automating processes using Internet of Things (IoT) and reducing the need for intermediaries, blockchains can increase the efficiency of supply chains. In tandem, smart contracts can automatically trigger payments or other actions when predefined conditions are met, whereby speeding up transactions and reducing delays; this efficiency is particularly important in times of crisis when the timely delivery of goods and services is critical. Also, blockchain technology can be used to manage and mitigate risks in the supply chain by providing real-time data and analytics. For example, blockchain can help identify potential risks related to supplier reliability, geopolitical factors or environmental conditions, allowing companies to take proactive measures to address these risks and ensure the resilience of their supply chains.

Moreover, economic inclusion is a key component of economic resilience as it ensures that all individuals and communities have access to the resources and opportunities needed to participate in the economy. Blockchain technology can promote economic inclusion in several ways; blockchain-based financial services, such as DeFi platforms and digital wallets, can provide access to financial services for individuals who are currently unbanked or underbanked. By reducing the barriers to entry and lowering transaction costs, blockchain can help bring more people into the formal economy, increasing their economic resilience. [SMEs account for 95%](https://globalnaps.org/issue/small-medium-enterprises-smes/#:~:text=The%20approximately%20400%20million%20SMEs,60%25%2D70%25%20of%20employment.) of all companies and employ between 60% -70% of all workers, but they often face challenges in accessing finance and markets. Blockchains can help address these challenges by providing SMEs with access to decentralised financing options, such as peer-to-peer lending or tokenised assets. Additionally, blockchain can help SMEs integrate into global supply chains by providing greater transparency and trust so enabling them to compete on a level playing field with larger companies.

Blockchain technology can also be used to create decentralised identity systems that provide individuals with a secure and verifiable digital identity. This can be particularly important in regions where traditional forms of identification are lacking or unreliable. By providing individuals with a digital identity, blockchain can facilitate access to financial services, social programs and other resources that are essential for economic participation and resilience. Estonia, a pioneer in digital governance, has implemented a blockchain-based e-residency program that allows individuals from around the world to establish a digital identity and access Estonian e-services, such as banking and company registration. [The e-Residency program](https://www.e-resident.gov.ee/) leverages blockchain technology to provide a secure and verifiable digital identity for participants. This digital identity can be used to access a wide range of services, including opening a bank account, signing contracts and declaring taxes, all without the need to be physically present in Estonia. The e-Residency program has enhanced Estonia's economic resilience by attracting entrepreneurs and businesses from around the world, boosting the country's economy and increasing its global competitiveness. Additionally, the use of blockchain for digital identity ensures that participants' data is secure and tamper-proof, reducing the risk of identity theft and fraud.

Essentially, blockchain technology could redefine economic resilience, but at what cost? If decentralising financial systems reduces risk, could it also introduce new vulnerabilities? DeFi could truly replace traditional banking but could it crack under crisis pressure? Streamlining global payments and supply chains sounds revolutionary, but can blockchain scale without geopolitical and regulatory backlash? And, with central bank digital currencies on the rise, traditional monetary policies will need to be adapted - or, left behind. Whilst blockchain technology offers access to the unbanked and helps SMEs compete, it could deepen the digital divide for those without tech access. And, as digital identities take off, are we safeguarding privacy or opening doors to surveillance? Undoubtedly blockchain’s potential to reshape resilience is massive - but so are the risks. Therefore, us the promise of a more secure, transparent world enough to outweigh the dangers of a tech-driven future….?
