---
title: "A ‘whale’ of a problem in the crypto class?"
description: "Crypto whales (owners of large sums of cryptocurrencies), individuals or entities holding massive amounts of cryptocurrency wield significant market power. And, whilst some see them as stabilising forces, others fear their manipulation. By using tools such as Whale Alert and Etherscan, more informed investment decisions can potentially be made. However, questions remain such as, can whales be fully tracked? Also, are they a necessary evil or a threat to a fair market? Hence, understanding these big players is crucial for navigating the ever-evolving crypto landscape."
date: 2024-07-23
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/a-whale-of-a-problem-in-the-crypto
year: 2024
---

# A ‘whale’ of a problem in the crypto class?

Every now and then, we hear of the movement of a crypto whale, and the waves of the market move in whichever direction they swim. Because [crypto whales](https://www.moonpay.com/learn/cryptocurrency/crypto-whales) are individuals or entities that hold a large amount of cryptocurrency, they have significant influence over the market due to their ability to buy or sell large quantities of coins, which can impact prices and market trends. In the context of Web3, crypto whales are often seen as key players in decentralised finance (DeFi) projects and blockchain ecosystems. Here are some key points to know about crypto whales:

> · **large holdings** \- crypto whales typically hold large amounts of cryptocurrencies, making their actions significant in the market
> 
> · **market impact** \- due to their large holdings, whales have the power to influence prices and market trends through their buying and selling activities
> 
> · **whale watching** \- keeping an eye on whale activity can provide insights into potential market movements and trends
> 
> · **risks and opportunities** \- whilst following whale activity can be informative, it is important to approach trading decisions cautiously as whales can also create volatility in the market.

Crypto whales can be both famous figures and anonymous entities. Public whales include industry leaders such as Changpeng Zhao (CEO of Binance) and Michael Saylor (CEO of the US-quoted firm, MicroStrategy), whilst anonymous whales encompass anyone with substantial holdings, such as the mysterious Satoshi Nakamoto (alleged inventor of Bitcoin) and various large wallet addresses tracked by blockchain analysts. Santiment, a crypto data platform, [describes whales as wallets holding over $100,000 worth of crypto](https://insights.santiment.net/read/whale-and-shark-watching-after-crypto-markets-climb-7861), except for Bitcoin (BTC) and Ethereum (ETH) due to their significantly larger market capitalisations - you need to have over 1,000 BTC to be referred to as a BTC whale. For other tokens, ownership is far more concentrated than in Bitcoin. The top holders will control more of the supply and this puts ordinary investors at a significant disadvantage - they have less power to influence the market and are more vulnerable to price manipulation by these whales. Some argue this concentration is similar to early stage investing in traditional markets or that whales will not sell due to long-term belief in cryptos; they could decide to sell their holdings, potentially causing significant price swings and leaving regular investors exposed. As such, the onus is on regular investors to protect themselves and so learning about these whales and their movement is one such way.

Crypto whales employ a variety of investment strategies. Some whales hold a long-term view, accumulating established cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and Ethereum, believing that their value will continue to rise over time - their large, early investments helped establish Bitcoin as a legitimate asset class and fuelled its initial price surges. Other whales, though, are more short-term focused, capitalising on market volatility and emerging trends. They may invest in new and promising projects with the potential for high returns (though these investments also carry a higher risk). A whale investing heavily in a new cryptocurrency can attract further investment and increase prices. However, whales can also cause rapid price swings if they decide to sell off their holdings. Of note, whales have veered towards alt and meme-coins in the past and they are following in a similar vein [now with tokens such as Shiba Inu, Floki, etc](https://timestabloid.com/crypto-whales-go-berserk-on-shiba-inu-shib-cardano-ada/). Some investors try and predict**** the movements of crypto whales given their impact on the price of crypto markets and so blockchain explorers such as [Etherscan](https://etherscan.io/) and platforms such as [Whale Alert](https://whale-alert.io/) serve as valuable tools for this purpose. Both these resources allow users to monitor large transactions and identify wallets with significant holdings and by analysing these on-chain activities, investors can try and gain insights into potential buying or selling pressure from whales. Furthermore, there are free and premium whale tracking tools with some of the whale tracking tools that traders need to have in their arsenal listed below:

> · [Whale Alert](https://whale-alert.io/)

Whale Alert tracks activity across multiple blockchains, sending out [free Twitter alerts](https://twitter.com/whale_alert) for the most noteworthy whale movements (large or interesting transactions). This is a very useful way to stay informed without spending a dime. Also, Whale Alert offers a paid API subscription for direct data access but be prepared to pay a monthly fee (starting at $49). Remember though, when exploring the comments on its Twitter alerts, be mindful of the difference between fact and pure speculation.

> · [Whalemap](https://whalemap.io/)

Whalemap focuses on the big picture of crypto whale activity, offering charts and analytics for Bitcoin and select ERC-20 tokens. It is ideal for those who wish to use on-chain data, not merely price, to inform their trading decisions. The platform tracks metrics such as large wallet inflows, transaction volumes and unusually large transactions. It even offers unique insights such as "HODL waves" (movement of long-term holders) and "address waves" (overall address activity). And, whilst a paid tier unlocks additional features, Whalemap provides substantial free data, making it a valuable tool for crypto traders who value on-chain analysis alongside price action.

> · [Arkham Intelligence](https://www.arkhamintelligence.com/)

Unlike Whalemap, which focuses on the bigger picture of whale movements and trends, Arkham Intelligence delves deeper, offering a powerful blend of blockchain explorer and crypto whale tracker. Supporting major networks, Arkham excels at identifying real-world entities behind blockchain addresses which include prominent figures, crypto exchanges, DAOs and project treasuries. For any whale you track, Arkham provides a treasure trove of free data, i.e. its on-chain portfolio, trading history, exchange usage and all linked transactions. This in-depth analysis makes Arkham Intelligence an essential tool for crypto traders who value blockchain-backed insights alongside traditional price action.

> · [DeBank](https://debank.com/)

DeBank is a user-friendly platform that tracks your on-chain portfolio and monitors addresses and goes beyond simple portfolio management. It allows you to track the activity and holdings of any address, making it ideal for following the investment strategies of successful crypto traders. This functionality extends to your own portfolio, providing a clear view of your crypto assets, NFTs and transaction history - all on the blockchain. DeBank is best suited for DeFi.

> · [Etherscan](https://etherscan.io/)

Etherscan is the most preferred tool for Ethereum enthusiasts, offering unparalleled depth of information on all transactions and accounts within the Ethereum blockchain. Although this comprehensive explorer is not the most user-friendly due to the sheer volume of data, it is an invaluable tool for those willing to dig deep. Whilst not explicitly a whale tracker, Etherscan can be used to that end, with some knowledge. You can analyse addresses identified through other platforms and gain a granular understanding of their activity on the Ethereum blockchain.

However, ultimately, tracking whales is not fool proof. Blockchain anonymity allows some whales to operate under the radar and, additionally, off-chain transactions (conducted outside the public blockchain) remain invisible. This means the information from on-chain activity may not provide a complete picture. Yet, despite these limitations, whale tracking offers valuable clues for navigating the crypto market and the presence and actions of crypto whales prompt deeper questions about market fairness and the potential for manipulation. While their influence can lead to significant gains, it also raises concerns about the power dynamics within the crypto market and the risks posed to smaller investors. As blockchain technology and cryptocurrency adoption continue to evolve, understanding and navigating the influence of these powerful market players remains a critical challenge for the future of decentralised finance.
