---
title: "Protecting endangered species with blockchain technology"
description: "The pressing challenges confronting wildlife conservation - such as habitat destruction, wildlife trafficking and climate change - mean conservationists are increasingly turning to emerging technologies such as blockchain, which itself offers innovative solutions despite concerns over energy consumption. And, collaboration between conservationists and blockchain experts is advocated to maximise benefits whilst addressing varying concerns, hence emphasising the transparent dialogue and experimentation to ensure effective conservation efforts amidst technological advancements."
date: 2024-07-16
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/protecting-endangered-species-with
year: 2024
---

# Protecting endangered species with blockchain technology

[Wildlife conservation](https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/wildlife-conservation#:~:text=Wildlife%20conservation%20is%20the%20practice,and%20stability%20to%20nature's%20processes.) represents focused action in protecting untamed creatures and the places they inhabit from the verge of disappearance - combining scientific and artistic elements to oversee environmental assets for the advantage of both current and forthcoming citizens of the world. Nevertheless, human actions pose significant dangers to wildlife, spanning from the ruin of habitats to excessive usage, pollution and alterations in climate. [These dangers](https://fastercapital.com/content/Traceability-in-Wildlife-Conservation--Protecting-Endangered-Species-update.html) have escalated in recent years, amplifying a complex dilemma that jeopardises numerous species with habitat destruction and fragmentation emerge prominently among the imminent perils encountered by endangered species. The swift expansion of urbanisation and industrial growth has resulted in the obliteration of crucial ecosystems, compelling species into reduced, secluded regions thereby hindering their capacity to locate partners and sustenance. Particularly, the Sumatran orangutans confront a bleak outlook owing to the clearing of forests for palm oil cultivation.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!3BnM!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fc60bef19-115f-4a1f-8c26-e537416e0100_1102x1008.png)

Source: [X (Twitter)](https://twitter.com/MonaPatelT/status/1411835971763511300?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw%7Ctwcamp%5Etweetembed%7Ctwterm%5E1411835971763511300%7Ctwgr%5E1649c4ae7afc79d09c9f18f2f65d699566e327a7%7Ctwcon%5Es1_c10&ref_url=https%3A%2F%2Fpublish.twitter.com%2F%3Furl%3Dhttps%3A%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FMonaPatelT%2Fstatus%2F1411835971763511300)

Correspondingly, the illicit global wildlife trafficking, driven by the desire for traditional remedies and rare pets, represents a serious danger to emblematic creatures such as rhinos and elephants. Without doubt, enhancing measures against poaching and enforcing more stringent legal structures are crucial to tackle this threat. Climate change adds another significant hurdle, disturbing ecosystems with increasing temperatures and severe weather occurrences, consequently impacting species such as coral reefs and polar bears. Essentially, dealing with climate change requires worldwide collaboration and adaptable conservation approaches to protect endangered species. Moreover, invasive species and diseases exacerbate the dangers facing native wildlife, promoting resource competition and driving species nearer to extinction. Precise management of invasive species and strong biosecurity measures are essential for protecting endangered wildlife. In addition, conflicts between humans and wildlife intensify as animals invade human habitats, frequently leading to fatal outcomes; implementing efficient mitigation tactics, such as building wildlife-friendly barriers, is crucial for promoting harmonious cohabitation.

Meanwhile, conservationists endeavouring to leverage technology encounter a myriad of challenges and constraints. These encompass upfront and maintenance costs, a shortage of tech skills among users, limited access to training, fierce competition for funding, duplication of effort and concerns regarding scalability and sustainability of tech solutions. [Traditional conservation](https://medium.com/@syednaadealirizvi001/the-role-of-blockchain-in-wildlife-conservation-protecting-endangered-species-0d1801432b08) methods often grapple with a lack of transparency in data collection and management, thereby impeding the efficacy of conservation initiatives and hindering accurate progress tracking and the inefficiencies in data management further compound these challenges, resulting in delays in decision-making and inadequate resource allocation. And, when tackling these obstacles, [emerging technologies](https://www.fauna-flora.org/explained/what-is-conservation-technology-how-tech-solutions-can-protect-the-worlds-wildlife/#:~:text=AI%20%26%20machine%20learning&text=Thermal%20cameras%20are%20able%20to,on%20their%20unique%20thermal%20shapes) assume a crucial position; ranging from camera traps and [geographic information systems](https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/business-government/tools-support/gis/what-is-gis#:~:text=GIS%20stands%20for%20Geographic%20Information,information%2C%20particularly%20information%20about%20location.) (GIS) mapping to drones and AI, these technological advancements offer fresh paths for monitoring and safeguarding endangered species. Through amalgamating traditional conservation approaches with emerging technologies, conservation entities can augment their endeavours to preserve biodiversity for forthcoming generations. [Blockchain technology](https://reintech.io/blog/blockchain-for-wildlife-conservation-and-tracking#google_vignette) has emerged as a revolutionary factor in wildlife conservation endeavours, utilising its decentralised ledger system to redefine transparency and accountability, a perfect instrument for tracing and supervising endangered species. Through establishing unalterable records of animal populations, migrations and genetic data, blockchains enable conservationists to make well-informed choices regarding protection strategies and anti-poaching initiatives. For instance, blockchain technology can be leveraged to track the movement of endangered species by equipping them with GPS devices and securely storing the data on a blockchain - this real-time tracking of animal movements aids in monitoring and preventing illegal poaching activities. [The World Wildlife Fund (WWF) highlights blockchain technology's role](https://www.cryptoaltruism.org/blog/how-blockchain-can-help-protect-endangered-species#:~:text=One%20of%20the%20critical%20areas,of%20origin%20to%20final%20destination) in facilitating secure data distribution in innovative conservation projects, including monitoring wildlife over large areas and tracking the supply chain of marine species from ocean to dinner plate. Furthermore, blockchain technology has been effectively utilised to track ivory and fish populations, serving an essential function in the battle against overfishing and the illegal wildlife trade. Worryingly, and according to the Living Planet Index, the [size of animal populations has declined by an estimated 69%, with at least 38,500 species currently under threat, and 16,300 believed to be endangered](https://earth.org/how-many-endangered-species-are-there/). Blockchain-powered platforms offer a glimmer of hope in the fight to protect these species since, despite the concerning decline in animal populations, blockchain presents a ray of hope in the endeavour to safeguard these species.

However, implementing blockchain solutions for wildlife conservation encompasses several phases, including defining conservation objectives, choosing the suitable blockchain platform, designing data schemas, developing smart contracts and integrating IoT devices for data gathering. Nonetheless, blockchain's capabilities go beyond monitoring and tracking endangered species; it can also enhance transparency in supply chains, especially in combating the illegal wildlife trade. By documenting transactions along supply chains, blockchains can empower authorities to trace the origin of illicit goods and uncover criminal networks. Furthermore, blockchain technology promotes data sharing through incentivised token systems, encouraging cooperation among stakeholders. Blockchains also facilitate the digitisation of physical assets through tokenisation, creating digital counterparts of animals or ecosystems, in effect a digital certificate of data. These digital assets harbour essential details concerning animal health, location and genetic information, facilitating enhanced monitoring and conservation efforts for endangered species. Moreover, blockchain supports assets backed by natural capital whereby enabling individuals and organisations to invest in conservation endeavours and safeguard natural resources. Crypto philanthropy has emerged as a significant trend in supporting wildlife conservation, with platforms (e.g. The Giving Block) facilitating crypto donations to non-governmental organisations (NGOs). Through platforms such as [The Giving Block](https://thegivingblock.com/) and [Endowment](https://endaoment.org/), individuals can contribute their cryptocurrency to support conservation-focused non-governmental organisations NGOs. Alternatively, the [Animal Index Fund](https://thegivingblock.com/impact-index-funds/animals/) splits these donations amongst the several conservation organisations. [NFT fundraising projects](https://news.mongabay.com/2022/07/beyond-bored-apes-blockchain-polarizes-wildlife-conservation-community/) also contribute to conservation efforts by donating a percentage of sales to charitable causes. For example, the [WildCards platform](https://news.mongabay.com/2022/07/beyond-bored-apes-blockchain-polarizes-wildlife-conservation-community/#:~:text=Since%20its%20launch%20in%202019,like%20Kenya%2C%20India%20and%20Malaysia.) has raised approximately $77,000 (until July 26, 2022), with the funds distributed to grassroots-level conservation organisations worldwide. These initiatives engage the crypto community and raise awareness, creating a more engaged and supportive network dedicated to protecting endangered species.

**Conservation**

The unveiling of the [Mini Harambe (MHB) project](https://menafn.com/1108284592/Introducing-Mini-Harambe-MHB-A-Crypto-Token-For-Good-Supporting-Wildlife-And-Rainforest-Conservation-Efforts) signifies an interesting advancement in wildlife and rainforest conservation using blockchain technology. MHB, a distinctive crypto token, is tailored to finance conservation initiatives and provide backing for endangered species, seamlessly intertwining cryptocurrency with a noble objective. MHB introduces a pioneering approach to conservation funding by utilising blockchain technology and cryptocurrency, so ensuring transparency, security and efficiency. It is dedicated to safeguarding endangered species and preserving rainforests, featuring essential elements such as a conservation-focused approach, community participation, secure and transparent transactions and unique tokenomics. Additionally, MHB introduces forward-looking initiatives akin to a Play2Earn game that educates players about conservation and also a multi-chain aggregator platform named MiniSwap. And, since its inception, MHB has achieved significant milestones including forging partnerships with conservation organisations and securing listings on major cryptocurrency exchanges, underscoring its unwavering commitment to its mission.

However, despite the promising advantages that blockchain technology brings to wildlife conservation, it encounters scepticism and disapproval from the conservation community. A significant concern arises regarding the [substantial energy consumption linked to specific blockchain networks](https://reintech.io/blog/blockchain-for-wildlife-conservation-and-tracking#google_vignette). Critics argue that the energy-intensive aspect of blockchain transactions contradicts the aim of environmental conservation. Moreover, challenges associated with integrating blockchain into current systems and data sources present hurdles to its adoption in conservation initiatives. Although many chose to ignore [50% of Bitcoin mining now relying on renewable energy](https://www.forbes.com/sites/digital-assets/2024/02/01/future-of-energy-how-solar-power-is-fueling-the-cryptocurrency-boom/#:~:text=Amidst%20environmental%20fears%2C%20skeptics%20often,according%20to%20the%20same%20source.) sources, including over 23% from hydropower and over 7% from solar power. Legal and ethical dilemmas concerning data privacy and security also emerge, raising uncertainties about the transparency and responsibility of blockchain-driven solutions. Two years ago, the [ WWF initially planned to raise conservation funds through NFTs but shelved the initiative shortly after](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2022/02/09/wwf-uk-ends-sale-nfts-backlash-angering-crypto-community/). Furthermore, the UK chapter faced backlash for its NFT release, lambasted for its environmental impact. Critics also argue that [the energy-intensive nature of blockchain transactions conflicts with the goal of environmental conservation](https://www.theverge.com/2022/2/8/22923530/world-wildlife-fund-nft-polygon-layer-2-blockchain-energy-emissions), whilst the WWF believed it had found a climate-friendly solution by utilising Polygon, a Layer 2 blockchain. Despite WWF's optimism, the controversy prompted the scrapping of the initiative, spotlighting the ongoing debate surrounding NFTs' environmental impact. Furthermore, to surmount the challenges hindering the integration of blockchain technology in wildlife conservation, organisations need to meticulously consider various factors. Remote blockchain developers offer a solution by tapping into a global talent pool, thereby enabling the creation of robust conservation solutions; nevertheless, challenges emerged when confronted with ground realities. Questions abound regarding how the benefits of blockchain technology will be shared and accessed, particularly in regions where technology accessibility is limited. The reliance on trusted intermediaries may undercut the decentralised nature of blockchain, underscoring the importance of integrating technology with ground-level governance and policy. [Oberhauser](https://news.mongabay.com/2022/07/beyond-bored-apes-blockchain-polarizes-wildlife-conservation-community/) emphasises the imperative of integrating the technology with ground-level governance and policy, highlighting the gap between technological understanding and local governance and natural resource management. Pioneering and experimenting with blockchain technology before its application in conservation efforts is crucial to ensure effectiveness and mitigate risks.

So, despite the controversies enveloping blockchains into wildlife conservation, opportunities for collaboration and dialogue are plentiful; establishing partnerships between conservation organisations and blockchain experts can facilitate knowledge exchange and foster innovative solutions. Nonetheless, managing expectations and fostering trust are essential facets of successful collaboration. Conservation efforts must navigate the delicate balance between technological advancement and environmental conservation. However, by nurturing collaboration and addressing concerns through transparent dialogue, conservationists and blockchain experts can collaborate to maximise the potential benefits of blockchain technology in protecting wildlife and preserving ecosystems.
