---
title: "SMEs and digital payments: a transformative shift"
description: "The global landscape for SMEs is rapidly changing, particularly in digital payments, with a projected GDP growth of 75% driven by advancements in digital finance and embedded payment solutions. Currently valued at $2.5 trillion, embedded B2B payments are expected to reach $6.5-$7 trillion. These systems enhance cash flow management and reduce costs whereby benefitting both small and large businesses but, in time, will we look back and see examples such as DBS Bank's Token Services as a real ‘digital bank account’? Industry leaders such as PayPal, Square and Stripe are paving the way for digital transformation, emphasising efficiency and financial inclusion in an evolving economic landscape."
date: 2024-11-12
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/smes-and-digital-payments-a-transformative
year: 2024
---

# SMEs and digital payments: a transformative shift

The global landscape for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) is undergoing a significant transformation, particularly in how they engage with digital payments. A remarkable projection suggests that [global GDP could expand by 75% within the next five years](https://www.financemagnates.com/fintech/real-time-payments-to-boost-global-gdp-by-74-in-five-years/), largely fuelled by advancements in digital finance and embedded payment solutions. According to [Daniel Artin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/daniel-artin/) at [Boost Payment Solutions](https://www.boostb2b.com/), the volume of [embedded B2B payments](https://www.pymnts.com/news/b2b-payments/2024/embedded-payments-become-backbone-of-b2b-commerce/) is currently around $2.5 trillion, with expectations of growth to $6.5 to $7 trillion in the coming years. This rapid expansion highlights the crucial role of embedded payments for businesses of all sizes, enabling them to enhance operational efficiency, reduce costs and bolster financial resilience. For smaller companies, the shift towards embedded payment systems provides real-time cash flow insights that are vital for maintaining day-to-day operations. In turn, larger firms benefit from reduced payment cycles, streamlining their workflows and fostering better supplier relationships. Beyond mere speed and convenience, embedded payments offer businesses the potential to unlock new revenue streams and gain unparalleled visibility into their financial operations. And, as the digital economy evolves, a pressing question emerges: will businesses fully embrace these capabilities to transform their operations, or will they risk falling behind in this pivotal digital innovation shift?

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!4r4x!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F0d11bc91-94cc-4d67-9c87-261b28ffad80_972x554.png)

Source: TeamBlockchain Ltd ([McKinsey)](https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-insights/global-payments-in-2024-simpler-interfaces-complex-reality)

In Singapore, DBS Bank has taken a pioneering step by launching its [Token Services, so integrating blockchain technology into banking](https://www.theblock.co/post/321926/singapores-biggest-bank-dbs-introduces-token-services-to-enable-blockchain-based-banking?utm_campaign=website&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=newsletter). This innovative service aims to simplify the user experience by eliminating the need for cumbersome processes, such as recalling lengthy memorable words or switching funds between digital wallets for everyday transactions, e.g. buying a coffee. By utilising blockchain and smart contracts, DBS enhances liquidity management and streamlines customer engagement through solutions including treasury tokens for multi-currency settlements and conditional payments that optimise workflows - this strategic move signals a significant advance in blockchain adoption within banking. So, how might these innovations reshape the future of banking and open new avenues for business growth?

Already, digital money is transforming the operational landscape for SMEs, optimising transactions, enhancing cash flow management and creating new growth opportunities; one notable aspect of this transformation is the rise of real-time payments, which have emerged as a vital tool for cash flow optimisation.

In addition, digital payment platforms, such as mobile wallets and real-time systems, empower SMEs to maintain healthy cash flow. For example, in India, the Unified Payments Interface (UPI) enables instant payment reception, allowing SMEs to manage day-to-day expenses and pay suppliers promptly, thus avoiding the delays typically associated with traditional banking methods. In addition to optimising cash flow, digital payments also offer significant cost efficiency; compared to conventional methods such as checks or credit card payments, digital transactions generally incur lower fees. For example, services such as PayPal and Stripe enable SMEs to minimise costs whilst eliminating the need for extensive physical infrastructure. This advantage is especially beneficial for micro and small businesses in sectors such as e-commerce and gig work, ultimately enhancing their profitability and operational agility. Moreover, digital money broadens market access for SMEs by facilitating e-commerce and enabling participation in global markets. Shopify and Etsy are platforms which seamlessly integrate with digital payment gateways, allowing SMEs to sell products internationally without the constraints of local currencies. This expansion not only broadens their customer base but also empowers them to compete effectively against larger enterprises, thus fostering a more inclusive marketplace. Meanwhile, the integration of embedded finance is revolutionising B2B payments for SMEs by incorporating payment solutions directly into the operational software they use. This innovative approach enhances receivables and payables management by automating invoicing and tracking payments. For instance, an SME utilising QuickBooks with integrated payment solutions can streamline payroll and vendor payments, significantly reducing administrative burdens and freeing up resources for growth.

Furthermore, financial inclusion is another area where digital payments are making a considerable impact. By providing SMEs access to alternative lending options based on transaction history, digital payments help bypass traditional banking hurdles. Services such as PayPal Working Capital assess creditworthiness through transaction records, allowing for fast, unsecured financing. A prime example is Chalkboard Tee, a custom apparel shop that has leveraged PayPal Working Capital to expand inventory and hire staff, resulting in a remarkable 30% revenue increase. Additionally, digital currencies, including Bitcoin and stablecoins, are simplifying cross-border transactions for SMEs. Businesses operating in countries with volatile currencies can use stablecoins to shield themselves against fluctuations, facilitating smoother financial planning and enhancing operational stability. This development not only alleviates some of the challenges associated with international transactions but also provides SMEs with greater flexibility and resilience in an increasingly interconnected global economy. As digital payment systems continue to evolve, they hold the potential to further empower SMEs, allowing them to thrive in a competitive landscape. [Natalie Lewis](https://www.linkedin.com/in/natalie-lewis-50798734/), Partner and Head of Fintech, Market Infrastructure & Payments at leading London law firm, Travers Smith, comments that: “ _The transformation of digital payments in recent years has offered unparalleled growth opportunities for both SMEs and the payments firms that support their businesses, especially by gaining access to markets across the world. That said, this does mean that navigating evolving legal and regulatory environments across borders is a more important consideration than ever before. For example, the different approaches being taken by the UK and the EU to regulating stablecoins means that SMEs should not assume that their payments needs can be met on a one-size-fits-all basis across Europe. Regulators and policymakers around the world are very interested in the convergence of distributed ledger technology and digital payments solutions. Fortunately, this interest can often be positive - for instance, in October, the Governor of the Bank of England personally gave a[speech](https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2024/october/andrew-bailey-panellist-at-the-g30-39-annual-international-banking-seminar) in which he said that the case for harnessing digital technology in payments has been made, and committed the Bank to enabling digital innovation in payments. The UK's central bank is not alone in this interest: the ECB have [opened](https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/intro/news/html/ecb.mipnews241031.en.html) an initiative to allow innovative payments firms to conduct experiments with a simulated digital euro platform for 'conditional payments'. As a regulatory lawyer, it is encouraging to see this level of engagement, rather than excessive caution or even hostility_.” 

Ans, as the landscape of digital payments evolves, various companies are positioning themselves to lead this transformation. PayPal, for instance, has made significant strides by [enabling small businesses to access loans based on their PayPal transaction history](https://www.thefundingfamily.com/blog/paypal-business-loan), with repayments linked to a percentage of sales. This flexible approach allows businesses to manage their cash flow effectively during low-revenue periods, raising questions about whether PayPal will soon enable transactions in digital dollars, euros, yen or pounds to further streamline financial operations. [Square’s payment solutions](https://academyflex.com/squares-success-story-innovation-in-mobile-payment-solutions/) are another example of how technology is empowering SMEs, including coffee shops and retail outlets, to accept a range of payment methods without relying on traditional point-of-sale systems. A case in point is Yhe Penny Ice Creamery in Santa Cruz, which has utilised Square to enhance transaction efficiency, leading to significant business expansion across the region. Beyond simplifying payments, Square also provides valuable sales analytics and inventory management tools, which help businesses scale effectively in a competitive marketplace. [Stripe is also making waves in the digital payments landscape](https://www.chaincatcher.com/en/article/2148168), recently bolstered by its acquisition of Bridge for over $1.1 billion. This move highlights Stripe's commitment to facilitating various payment methods, including credit cards and digital wallets. As SMEs navigate the digital finance ecosystem, Stripe is poised to offer innovative solutions that cater to their evolving needs.

In addition to these advancements, industry giants such as Visa and Mastercard are actively exploring the tokenised space, indicating a significant shift in payment processing. [Mastercard's Multi Token Network (MTN)](https://www.mastercard.com/news/perspectives/2024/the-next-generation-of-blockchain-and-banking-fusing-the-flexibility-of-crypto-with-the-convenience-of-fiat/) exemplifies its strategy to merge the flexibility of cryptocurrency with the convenience of fiat currencies. Meanwhile, [in October 2024, Visa launched a sandbox program aimed at assisting businesses in integrating blockchain and digital assets](https://www.pymnts.com/visa/2024/visa-debuts-tokenized-asset-sandbox-to-promote-blockchain-integration/) into its operations, further underscoring the industry’s push toward modernisation. Certainly, the pace of innovation is accelerating across the payments sector, as demonstrated by [JP Morgan’s assertion that the landscape has undergone remarkable changes](https://www.jpmorgan.com/insights/payments/payment-trends/payments-are-eating-the-world) in the last decade: “ _In 2010, the fastest way to move money on the same day from New York to London was to catch a flight from JFK to Heathrow and deliver it yourself. Now, you can initiate a secure, real-time payment that’s sent and received into your account in seconds at virtually no cost and in any currency. Not just from New York to London, but from New York to anywhere - including space. The last decade for payments has been extraordinary. However, payments are on the cusp of an even greater revolution.”_ Indeed, its initiative, [JP Coin, which processes over $1 billion daily](https://www.fnlondon.com/articles/citi-jpmorgan-and-six-finally-see-big-business-in-blockchain-0ee70621), reflects a commitment to leading the future of digital transactions and illustrates the potential for rapid evolution in payment technologies.__[Ripple is also playing a transformative role in cross-border payment service](https://www.crypto-news-flash.com/xrp-news-new-report-shows-how-ripple-payments-is-a-game-changer-for-local-banks-in-supporting-small-business-transactions/)s for SMEs by leveraging its blockchain-based solutions. By utilising XRP as a bridge currency, Ripple facilitates faster and more cost-effective settlements whilst adhering to global regulatory standards. As B2B payment volumes surge, with the market expected to reach an estimated $174 trillion, the question remains whether Ripple's innovations will successfully modernise global payment systems or if further challenges will impede widespread adoption. As these companies continue to innovate and adapt, the future of digital payments holds great promise for SMEs worldwide, paving the way for more efficient and accessible financial transactions.

Ultimately, as we look ahead, the rise of digital payments signifies more than just an improvement in operational efficiency for SMEs; it represents a fundamental shift that empowers them to thrive in an ever-evolving marketplace. The potential for growth and competitive advantage is vast, yet it remains to be seen whether SMEs will embrace these technological advancements to their fullest extent. Will they be agile enough to adapt to the new landscape, or will they risk falling behind their more innovative counterparts? No doubt, the choices they make now will shape their future in the digital economy.
