---
title: "Quantum computing and its looming impact on crypto "
description: "Written by Haydn Jones, Kroll.  With its qubits capable of multiple states, quantum computing can solve problems far faster than classical computers. Unsurprisingly, this threatens cryptocurrencies which depend on cryptographic algorithms for security. Potentially, cryptos will need major upgrades, requiring community consensus and possible hard forks in order to adopt these new algorithms. As quantum computing advances, the crypto community must act now to ensure a secure, future-ready ecosystem."
date: 2024-08-06
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/quantum-computing-and-its-looming
year: 2024
---

# Quantum computing and its looming impact on crypto 

As an Electronics Engineer, one of my favourite courses whilst at Manchester University (many, many, many years ago) covered the operation of microprocessors, and it is with some pride that, at one point in my academic studies, I could explain the operation of a computer from the screen and keyboard down to electrons in the transistors making up the microprocessors. It might take a little more time to do the same today, but the basic principles have stayed with me. So, it is against that backdrop that I have always remained interested in developments in computing - quantum computing being one of the areas that I follow keenly especially as it relates to its potential impact on crypto, and the risk it poses to the underlying algorithms.

Quantum computing differs fundamentally from classical computing. While classical computers use ‘bits’ as the smallest unit of data, represented as either 0 or 1, quantum computers use quantum bits, or qubits. Qubits can exist simultaneously in an infinite number of multiple states, thanks to the principles of superposition and entanglement. It is only when qubits are observed in a classical sense that their true state crystallizes. Microprocessors, whether classical or quantum based, process numerical problems, the algorithms themselves reducing mathematical operators down to addition, which is fundamentally about the relationship between two or more values. In the classical world, value representation is down to the electrical charge associated with a transistor and the way it represents a value, usually 1. In the quantum world, it is about the quantum state of an atom, albeit an infinite number of different values can be represented simultaneously, and with multiple atoms in quantum states all interacting; this allows large numerical sets to be processed simultaneously. As soon as we start linking these different values together, reading out the results and inputting a new set of values, we start to be able to solve numerical problems. Classical computers are linear in the way they process data - within the microprocessor, the values are fed in and the results read out. Quantum computing provides the ability to create high degrees of multi-parallelism, so simulating the relationship between sets of numbers at a point in time. All of this allows quantum computers to process information at exponentially faster rates than classical computers, and therefore solve complex mathematical problems faster than silicon-based microprocessors. Incidentally, the latter will always be constrained by [Moore’s Law](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/newsroom/resources/moores-law.html) because, at some point, atoms will not get any smaller whereas quantum computing presents a size advantage which goes beyond the atomic level - meaning, more compute power per volume of free space.

Cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin and Ethereum, rely on cryptographic algorithms to secure transactions and control the creation of new units aka tokens. The most widely used cryptographic methods include public-key cryptography and hashing algorithms. These methods are designed to make it computationally infeasible to break the underlying algorithm using classical computers. Public-key cryptography, or asymmetric cryptography, uses a pair of keys - a public key for encryption and a private key for decryption. [Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (RSA](https://www.encryptionconsulting.com/education-center/what-is-rsa/)) and [Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC)](https://www.techtarget.com/searchsecurity/definition/elliptical-curve-cryptography#:~:text=Elliptical%20curve%20cryptography%20\(ECC\)%20is,and%20more%20efficient%20cryptographic%20keys.) are common algorithms across many different types of cryptocurrencies and the security of these algorithms is based on the difficulty of factoring large numbers (RSA) or solving the discrete logarithm problem (ECC). [Hashing algorithms](https://www.okta.com/uk/identity-101/hashing-algorithms/), such as SHA-256 used in Bitcoin, convert input data into a fixed-size string of characters. These are one-way functions, meaning it’s infeasible to revert the output back to the original input; hashing ensures the integrity of data and is fundamental to blockchain technology. For both public-key cryptography and hashing algorithms, quantum computing poses a significant threat. Quantum algorithms, such as [Shor's algorithm](https://www.classiq.io/insights/shors-algorithm-explained), can factor large numbers exponentially faster than classical algorithms and this capability could render RSA and ECC encryption obsolete. If attackers with a sufficiently powerful quantum computer gain access to a public key, they could potentially derive the corresponding private key, compromising the security of cryptocurrency wallets and transactions. Meanwhile, [Grover's algorithm](https://learning.quantum.ibm.com/course/fundamentals-of-quantum-algorithms/grovers-algorithm) can search unsorted databases faster than classical algorithms. Applied to hashing, it could find hash collisions (different inputs that produce the same hash value) more efficiently. Although this does not completely break hash functions like SHA-256, it significantly reduces their security.

While the potential threats are concerning, the development of quantum computing technology is still in its infancy. Current quantum computers, such as those developed by IBM, Google, and other research institutions, are still in the so-called [Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) phase](https://www.quera.com/glossary/nisq#:~:text=Noisy%20Intermediate%2DScale%20Quantum%20\(NISQ,of%20quantum%20noise%20and%20error.). These machines have not yet reached the scale or reliability needed to break contemporary cryptographic algorithms. Estimates suggest that it could take another decade or more before large-scale, fault-tolerant quantum computers become a reality. The looming threat of quantum computing has spurred the development of quantum-resistant cryptographic algorithms. These algorithms are designed to be secure against quantum attacks. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), which promotes U.S. innovation and industrial competitiveness, is currently leading an initiative to standardize quantum-resistant cryptography, with several promising candidates under evaluation. [Algorithms such as lattice-based cryptography](https://utimaco.com/service/knowledge-base/post-quantum-cryptography/what-lattice-based-cryptography#:~:text=Lattice%2Dbased%20Cryptography%20explained&text=The%20name%20derives%20from%20the,not%20finite%20in%20any%20way.), hash-based cryptography, and multivariate polynomial cryptography are being explored. These methods rely on mathematical problems believed to be hard for quantum computers to solve. Although current hash functions are less vulnerable to quantum attacks, enhancing their complexity and adopting new quantum-resistant standards will ensure better protection.

Bringing all of this together, cryptocurrencies will need to undergo substantial upgrades to integrate quantum-resistant algorithms. This process will involve consensus among the community, developers and miners, which can be complex and time-consuming. Some cryptocurrencies may require hard forks - a bifurcation in the underlying blockchain that creates a new chain with improved security features. Hard forks can be controversial to implement and may lead to community fragmentation. Moreover, transitioning to quantum-resistant algorithms must consider compatibility with existing systems and addresses. And, maintaining interoperability while upgrading security is a critical challenge. Finally, quantum-resistant algorithms may require more computational power, potentially affecting transaction speeds and costs. Optimizing these algorithms for efficiency will be crucial. Despite the threats, quantum computing also offers innovative opportunities for cryptocurrencies in that the quantum-resistant algorithms will provide stronger security guarantees, furthering the long-term viability of cryptocurrencies. Additionally, leveraging quantum mechanics, quantum cryptography can create virtually unbreakable encryption through quantum key distribution (QKD). This could lead to the development of ultra-secure cryptocurrency protocols. Also, quantum computing could enable more efficient consensus mechanisms, enhancing scalability and reducing energy consumption. Quantum algorithms could optimize proof-of-stake and other consensus models, making them more robust and sustainable. Quantum computing presents both existential threats and transformative opportunities for cryptocurrency technology. While the potential to break current cryptographic standards is a significant concern, the development of quantum-resistant cryptography and the eventual integration of quantum technologies can lead to a more secure and innovative cryptocurrency ecosystem. The transition will require careful planning, community collaboration and continuous research. As the quantum approaches, crypto must remain vigilant and proactive to harness the benefits while mitigating the risks of this revolutionary technology.
