---
title: "Impact of the Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA) on business and cloud providers"
description: "The European Union's Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA), effective on January 17th, 2025, mandates a unified ICT risk management framework for the EU financial sector. The regulation applies to a broad range of financial entities and ICT service providers, aiming to enhance operational resilience through uniform technical standards. DORA impacts blockchain technology, cloud providers and multi-cloud strategies, so emphasising compliance, risk management and operational continuity. Meanwhile, non-compliance results in significant penalties, whereby reinforcing the importance of timely adherence to DORA's requirements."
date: 2024-08-06
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/impact-of-the-digital-operational
year: 2024
---

# Impact of the Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA) on business and cloud providers

The European Union's [Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA)](https://www.ibm.com/topics/digital-operational-resilience-act#:~:text=What%20is%20the%20DORA%3F,for%20the%20EU%20financial%20sector) is a regulation crafted to develop a thorough information communication technology (ICT) risk management framework for the financial sector within the EU. Coming into effect on January 17th, 2025, DORA intends to unify ICT risk management protocols across the EU, mandating that all financial entities and their essential third-party providers establish robust ICT systems. The regulation aims to address the formerly fragmented ICT risk management scenario by introducing uniform technical standards, whereby enhancing the operational resilience of the EU financial sector. DORA establishes a [comprehensive framework](https://www.marshmclennan.com/assets/insights/publications/2023/april/digital-operational-resilience-pov\(with-appendix\)-final.pdf) for ICT risk management in the EU financial sector and is structured around five key pillars:

> **1.** ICT risk management and governance mandates that the management body of a financial entity defines, approves, oversees and ensures the implementation of ICT risk management frameworks. This requires senior management and board-level accountability, linking the business strategy to the resilience strategy. An integrated risk management approach identifies critical business services and their instrumental assets, facilitating end-to-end management and effectively addressing the organisational implications.
> 
> **2.** The framework involves ICT-related incident reporting where financial entities must implement an incident management process to detect, manage and notify ICT-related incidents. Predictive analytics and early warning indicators are crucial for proactive incident management with entities being required to classify incidents based on severity and impact, so ensuring consistent reporting despite varying national requirements.
> 
> **3.** Digital operational resilience testing forms the third pillar. Entities are required to establish comprehensive testing programs covering IT systems, processes and people. These programs should be risk-based with testing of critical ICT systems annually and conducting threat-led penetration testing every three years. Independent internal or external parties must perform these tests to ensure thorough evaluation.
> 
> **4.** Managing third-party ICT risk is an integral component of the ICT risk framework. Financial entities must conduct due diligence on third-party providers, ensuring contracts clearly define rights and obligations. The strategy should be deliberate, considering the cost of risk management for smaller vendors.
> 
> **5.** Financial entities are encouraged to share cyber threat intelligence to enhance collective resilience. This involves exchanging indicators of compromise, tactics and procedures within trusted communities, ensuring the protection of sensitive information and adherence to data protection regulations.

DORA clearly applies to a [wide range of financial entities and ICT service providers](https://www.itgovernance.co.uk/eu-digital-operational-resilience-act#:~:text=Who%20does%20the%20DORA%20Regulation,Credit%20institutions) within the EU's financial sector, regardless of where these providers are based. Entities which are required to comply with DORA regulations include credit institutions, payment institutions and account information service providers. Examples of these are listed here below:

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!6AFb!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F48ad9294-36a0-41a8-8313-c5081c3253df_1488x684.png)

In addition, DORA significantly impacts blockchain technology, particularly due to its reliance on cloud service providers. For instance, the [Ethereum ecosystem](https://www.dlnews.com/articles/defi/ethereum-decentralisation-threatened-by-reliance-on-amazon/) (known for decentralisation), faces vulnerabilities from its heavy use of cloud computing. Overdependence on a single cloud provider can disrupt Ethereum, causing financial losses for stakers of Ether and undermining the core principles of DeFi. To mitigate these risks, the Ethereum community is urged to diversify hosting solutions and consider alternatives, such as [bare metal servers](https://www.ibm.com/topics/bare-metal-dedicated-servers) which offer dedicated hardware without shared cloud vulnerabilities. Incorporating blockchain into cloud services involves [technical and operational challenges](http://www.quadranttechnologies.com/challenges-of-incorporating-blockchain-into-cloud-service.php), and achieving resilience and compliance requires advanced resources and robust transaction management. The shortage of blockchain professionals certainly intensifies these challenges and hence encourages organisations to seek external expertise for operational continuity so that through multi-tier technical support and efficient maintenance systems, companies can overcome integration complexities and so ensure resilience and compliance. DORA also impacts cloud providers by [mandating multi-cloud strategies](https://www.synechron.com/en-gb/insight/dora-impact-public-cloud-what-you-need-know#:~:text=DORA%20aims%20to%20address%20the,cloud%20service%20providers%20\(CSPs\)) to reduce risks from single-provider reliance. Financial institutions (FIs) are required to comply with DORA by January 17th, 2025, introducing stringent requirements for third-party ICT providers including CSPs. DORA aims to enhance risk management and supervise critical third-party providers to safeguard against financial sector dependencies on digital infrastructure; FIs are adopting multi-cloud strategies to ensure portable workloads and mitigate concentration risks. To ensure DORA compliance firms may well have to have ‘[Threat-Led Penetration Testing](https://www.secura.com/services/integrated-approach/dora/what-is-threat-led-penetration-testing#:~:text='Threat%20Led%20Penetration%20Testing%2C%20or,can%20impact%20critical%20business%20functions.)’ and incident reporting, alignment to ensure that organisations are able to demonstrate ongoing compliance. These strategies enhance operational efficiency and resilience for FIs, aligning with DORA's goals in the digital era. Hence, prioritising [operational resiliency](https://www.ibm.com/blog/prioritizing-operational-resiliency-to-reduce-downtime-in-payments/) in payments is critical, in particular with the escalating risk of downtime in today's real-time payment landscape. According to IBM's “Cost of a Data Breach” report for 2023, the average cost of lost business following a data breach was $1.3 million, underscoring the financial and reputational risks at stake. Therefore, it is financial enterprises’ best interest to bolster their resiliency by adopting robust infrastructures that span multiple environments - integrating cloud, on-premises and edge computing solutions. This approach not only safeguards against disruptions but also enhances customer trust and regulatory compliance.

DORA certainly emphasises the need of cloud security via [regular testing and stringent risk management](https://sec-consult.com/blog/detail/unlocking-cloud-security-insights-from-the-dora-framework) (annually) for vulnerabilities, whereby ensuring secure implementation and configuration within cloud infrastructures. Moreover, Articles 31-44 of DORA categorise major cloud providers such as Microsoft Azure, Google Cloud Project, Oracle and AWS as critical third-party ICT service providers, with these providers being subject to rigorous audits by the European Union covering their ICT risk management frameworks, governance and physical security. This dual focus aims to secure both the cloud infrastructure used by financial organisations and the providers themselves; adopting the shared responsibility model is crucial, where cloud providers handle infrastructure security whilst customers manage data and access controls. Conducting assumed breach penetration tests can effectively identify vulnerabilities, so ensuring comprehensive security and resilience across cloud environments. And DORA is certainly not toothless, since it can imposes significant [penalties and operational risks for non-compliance](https://www.bbh.com/us/en/insights/blog/on-the-regs/exploring-the-impacts-of-dora.html#:~:text=DORA's%20Implications,for%20up%20to%20six%20months). Financial institutions and critical ICT providers are at risk of incurring fines, amounting to 1% of their average daily worldwide turnover for each day they are non-compliant and accumulating over a period of up to six months. This penalty structure emphasises the necessity of timely adherence to DORA's mandates: enforcement measures include rigorous monitoring and assessment of incidents impacting critical services, with criteria such as client impact, data loss, reputational damage, service downtime, geographic spread and economic implications determining the severity of incidents. Major ICT-related incidents must be reported within strict timelines, requiring initial notification within one business day followed by intermediate and final reports with detailed root-cause analyses. The regulatory framework also mandates the use of specific reporting templates to compile comprehensive registers of information, detailing relationships between entities and critical third-party service providers.

Essentially, by establishing a cohesive regulatory framework, DORA aims to bolster market stability, foster trust and ensure consistent operational practices. Financial entities benefit from enhanced cybersecurity measures and streamlined processes, aligning with EU-wide standards and reducing fragmentation in regulatory approaches. DORA’s implementation promotes a resilient digital infrastructure, supporting innovation and facilitating a level playing field across member states. It [equips financial institutions](https://www.ey.com/en_lu/wealth-asset-management/luxembourg-market-pulse/how-will-dora-impact-the-financial-sector-) with the tools to proactively manage ICT risks, respond to incidents effectively and maintain continuity in operations.

By enhancing transparency and accountability, DORA strengthens the financial sector’s ability to adapt to evolving threats and technological advancements thereby safeguarding consumer trust and promoting sustainable growth in digital financial services throughout Europe. DORA and the [Markets in Crypto-Assets Regulation (MiCAR)](https://kpmg.com/ie/en/home/insights/2023/04/mica.html) \- the EU's fundamental regulatory framework for crypto assets which establishes requirements for asset-referenced tokens, e-money tokens and other crypto assets - [together shape a comprehensive regulatory framework](https://www.osborneclarke.com/insights/dora-new-eu-cybersecurity-law-crypto) for the crypto assets market. Crypto assets are digital representations of value or rights stored and transferred using distributed ledger technology (DLT) and, although they resemble traditional assets, are inherently digital. As the economic value of crypto-assets is stored directly “on-chain”, then ensuring the security of DLT and related digital services is paramount. As the newest EU regulation, [DORA](https://natlawreview.com/article/euluxembourg-update-regulation-markets-crypto-assets-and-digital-operational) focuses on cybersecurity in the financial sector and greatly impacts the crypto assets market by updating and consolidating ICT risk management requirements. It mandates all financial institutions including crypto asset service providers (CASPs) and issuers of asset-referenced tokens to implement comprehensive ICT risk management frameworks, incident detection systems and operational resilience testing protocols. By integrating DORA's principles into MiCAR, the EU aims to ensures robust cybersecurity and operational resilience in the crypto assets market. This alignment addresses key risks such as money laundering, terrorism financing and the security of custodial services, so providing a secure and regulated environment for the growth and development of crypto assets within the EU.

So, alongside recent [US operational resilience developments](https://www.thebci.org/news/changes-on-the-horizon-to-u-s-operational-resilience-regulations.html), DORA reflects global efforts to fortify financial systems against escalating cyber risks and operational disruptions. And whilst both frameworks prioritise cybersecurity and resilience testing, DORA uniquely mandates comprehensive oversight of ICT third-party providers and rigorous incident reporting protocols. US guidelines are in contrast as they emphasise defining critical activities, setting disruption tolerances and bolstering third-party risk management. But notably, both regulatory frameworks highlight the [importance of flexibility](https://www.finextra.com/blogposting/26395/why-flexibility-is-key-for-the-upcoming-eu-dora-regulation) in compliance, so allowing financial institutions to adapt to evolving regulatory landscapes and technological advancements. DORA’s structured mandates provide a foundational framework for operational resilience, encouraging adaptable compliance strategies amidst rapid digital transformation and heightened cyber risks. This flexibility allows institutions to customise risk management frameworks to their unique operational contexts, fostering innovation whilst maintaining robust regulatory adherence. And, by promoting agility, DORA ensures that financial entities can effectively address dynamic threats and regulatory expectations across international markets, enhancing overall resilience and market stability.

So, with all this in mind, how prepared are you for DORA? And, is time is running for your organisation out to be compliant……?
