---
title: "Dollarisation vs Bitcoinisation"
description: "Recently, cryptocurrencies have been growing rapidly whereby creating a new paradigm for countries with economic instability and currency depreciation. For decades, in order to stabilise their economies, nations with high inflation or declining currencies have adopted the US dollar - officially or unofficially. However, the rise of stablecoins (digital assets pegged to fiat currencies) raises questions about whether they reinforce the dollar’s dominance rather than disrupt it. The future of ‘Bitcoinisation’, therefore, hinges on overcoming these challenges and proving its viability as a global monetary alternative."
date: 2024-12-11
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/dollarisation-vs-bitcoinisation
year: 2024
---

# Dollarisation vs Bitcoinisation

Countries with weak or volatile currencies often face economic uncertainty and high inflation, which can severely impact the daily lives of their citizens. These issues make it difficult for individuals and businesses to save, invest or plan for the future, as their local currency may rapidly lose value. For governments, inflation can limit their ability to borrow affordably, leaving them vulnerable to economic downturns and external financial shocks. In this context, people naturally seek alternatives that preserve value and allow for smoother trade and economic planning; historically, [dollarisation has served as a solution](https://cointelegraph.com/learn/articles/what-is-the-purpose-of-bitcoin-speculation-or-dollarization) for countries with these challenges. By adopting the US dollar, they can benefit from the stability and global acceptance of the currency, which reduces inflation and provides a level of economic security. Yet, dollarisation also comes with significant trade-offs - countries that adopt the dollar effectively relinquish monetary policy control to the US Federal Reserve since they lose the ability to manage their own interest rates or currency supply. Unsurprisingly, for some nations, this dependency on the US economy (and the policy choices of its central bank) can create vulnerabilities. So, could digital assets present an alternative to dollarisation?

In essence, [Bitcoinisation](https://bitcoinmagazine.com/hyperbitcoinization) is a decentralised, global alternative to dollarisation because Bitcoin is decentralised and less prone to manipulation or regulatory changes than traditional currencies. Furthermore, this independence offers a store of value unrelated to a central bank, which appeals to countries with excessive inflation. Bitcoin's production is limited to 21 million coins, generating scarcity that many believe can prevent fiat currency inflation; and besides its fixed supply, Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies are globally accessible and tradable - which is especially useful in nations with weak financial infrastructure. Digital assets certainly offer an alternative to traditional banking systems in underdeveloped or unreliable locations by enabling cross-border commerce, cheaper transfers and savings outside the official currency. In [El Salvador (the first country to legalise Bitcoin in 2021](https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/financial-services/pdf/el-salvadors-law-a-meaningful-test-for-bitcoin.pdf)), the citizens are able to use the cryptocurrency for daily transactions; Bitcoin has allowed many people to enter the financial economy in a country without traditional banking. Its transparency and immutability are also benefits in countries with little trust in government-run financial systems. Hence, El Salvador's Bitcoin adoption has challenged dollarisation as the fallback currency plan for other poor countries.

However, whilst both dollarisation and Bitcoinisation offer alternatives to national currencies, they differ fundamentally in structure and impact on sovereignty. Dollarisation typically involves adopting a foreign fiat currency, usually the US dollar, as either the official or de facto currency; this strategy provides stability but at the expense of monetary sovereignty. On the other hand, Bitcoinisation, utilises a decentralised digital currency that operates exclusive of any nation’s control, which allows countries to retain some degree of financial autonomy. Another distinction lies in accessibility and ease of adoption. Dollarisation is often a straightforward process as US dollars are readily available and widely accepted in international trade; the transition to dollarisation can thus be smoother than transitioning to a cryptocurrency. Conversely, Bitcoinisation requires access to digital wallets, a reliable internet connection and, ideally, a regulatory framework that supports cryptocurrency use. And in countries where infrastructure is lacking, these prerequisites pose barriers that dollarisation does not. Moreover, the fluctuating value of Bitcoin also represents a major difference. Whilst the US dollar offers stability and predictability, Bitcoin’s value can be volatile, so posing challenges for daily transactions and long-term financial planning. For countries considering Bitcoinisation, this volatility can be a deterrent as it adds a layer of unpredictability that could exacerbate rather than alleviate economic challenges.

Nonetheless, notwithstanding its problems, Bitcoinisation may have advantages to dollarisation for some economies. Bitcoinisation gives nations more economic independence by eliminating their dependence on the US banking system, and this independence may appeal to nations with strained US relations or those desiring economic sovereignty. Bitcoin can also protect against inflation in countries with recurrent currency devaluation since it is decentralised and cannot be inflated by a central bank, unlike the dollar. In Venezuela and Zimbabwe, where hyperinflation has left traditional currencies almost worthless, Bitcoin could be used to protect citizens' savings. Bitcoinisation can also help underbanked areas become financially integrated; blockchain technology lets remote residents save, transfer and manage their wealth without the need for a bank account and this can benefit developing economies with weak financial infrastructure. Additionally, remittances (which are vital to many developing nations) can be made cheaper and easier using Bitcoin's peer-to-peer nature - indeed, the [Bank of International Settlement](https://www.bis.org/publ/work1196.htm) (BIS) estimates that countries that have a 10% adoption of digital payments can experience a 1% growth in GDP within two years.

However, Bitcoinisation has drawbacks - Bitcoins price volatility hinders its adoption as a stable currency. Its value fluctuation makes it hard for individuals and businesses to manage budgets or price goods and services. The cryptocurrency’s price fluctuates owing to market sentiment, regulatory news and technological challenges, unlike the US dollar which is backed by the world's largest economy and central bank. Bitcoinisation also requires a strong digital infrastructure since cryptocurrency transactions require internet access, which is intermittent or expensive in developing nations. Bitcoin requires digital wallets and basic security knowledge, which can be difficult in low-tech areas and where literacy standards are low. These countries may also lack a legislative structure to regulate and facilitate Bitcoin adoption, creating legal issues and hazards for users. Security is another issue. Bitcoin's decentralisation has pros and cons; it eliminates the requirement for central authority trust but exposes consumers to cyberattacks and fraud. Phishing attempts, frauds and wallet hacks can wipe your accounts without regular bank security and hence this lack of consumer protection may inhibit consumers who might use Bitcoin instead of their national currency. However, countries such as El Salvador and Venezuela certainly offer valuable insights into the dynamics of Bitcoinisation - [El Salvador’s decision to make Bitcoin legal tender in 2021](https://www.rgs.org/schools/resources-for-schools/bitcoin-and-el-salvador) marked the first attempt by a sovereign nation to adopt a cryptocurrency as an official currency. The government of El Salvador has introduced incentives for Bitcoin adoption (including a state-run digital wallet) and has encouraged citizens to use Bitcoin for everyday transactions. Meanwhile, in [Venezuela, Bitcoin adoption has largely been driven by grassroots efforts](https://cryptoforinnovation.org/crypto-usage-grows-in-venezuela-despite-government-mismanagement/#:~:text=Bitcoin%20mining%20has%20been%20popular,banned%20the%20practice%20during%202024.) rather than government policy. With hyperinflation causing severe devaluation of the Venezuelan bolívar, many citizens have turned to Bitcoin as a means of preserving wealth and accessing goods and services that would otherwise be out of reach. Here, Bitcoinisation has served as an informal economic lifeline, allowing individuals to bypass the instability of the local currency.

So, as cryptocurrencies continue to evolve, Bitcoinisation may gain traction in more countries, especially those experiencing chronic currency instability and high inflation. However, for Bitcoinisation to compete with dollarisation as a viable option, several key developments are necessary. Countries will need to invest in digital infrastructure, roll out mass education programs, create supportive regulatory frameworks and address security concerns to foster a secure and accessible Bitcoin ecosystem. The future of Bitcoinisation may also depend on the development of more stable digital assets (such as stablecoins) which aim to combine the benefits of digital currencies with the price stability of traditional fiat currencies. Stablecoins could serve as a middle ground, offering the decentralised benefits of Bitcoin with reduced volatility, making them more practical for day-to-day transactions in inflation-prone economies. However, stablecoins backed by the US$ are increasing its dominance as the world’s reserve currency. According to Coinbase, stablecoins were used for[ $10.8 trillion](https://www.coinbase.com/institutional/research-insights/research/market-intelligence/stablecoins-new-payments-landscape) worth of transactions in 2023 (a 17% compared to 2022). While sizeable, stablecoin transactions pale into insignificance because McKinsey estimates global payments were over [$1.8 quadrillion](https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-insights/global-payments-in-2024-simpler-interfaces-complex-reality) in 2023. Essentially, is Bitcoinisation the next evolution in monetary sovereignty, or simply a volatile experiment in a world dominated by dollarisation? Whilst the US$ offers stability and widespread acceptance, its adoption often comes at the cost of national control over monetary policy. Bitcoin, albeit decentralised and scarce, promises autonomy and inflation resistance but is hampered by volatility and reliance on digital infrastructure. Hence, can the cryptocurrency overcome its infrastructure gaps and regulatory hurdles to rival the US dollar’s dominance? Furthermore, will the rise of stablecoins (a bridge between fiat and crypto) cement the dollar's supremacy even further as they facilitate trillions in transactions? As global economies wrestle with inflation, currency devaluation and financial inclusion, the debate intensifies: is Bitcoinisation a genuine contender to reshape monetary systems, or is it a volatile solution that amplifies existing risks? The future of money may hinge on how nations, particularly those in economic turmoil, answer these questions.
