---
title: "Demystifying non-liquidating accounts"
description: "The collapse of FTX has brought to light the critical risks associated with non-liquidating accounts which, despite their benefits, can pose significant threats to market stability if mismanaged. Whilst algorithmic stablecoins were a key factor, the overlooked impact of these accounts raises several pressing questions: How can crypto exchanges better manage the risks associated with non-liquidating accounts? What role should regulators play in ensuring transparency and accountability? Hence, understanding these elements is essential to prevent future crises and safeguard the long-term sustainability of the crypto industry."
date: 2024-10-01
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/demystifying-non-liquidating-accounts
year: 2024
---

# Demystifying non-liquidating accounts

Whilst algorithmic stablecoins were a prominent factor in crypto exchange ‘FTX’s’ collapse, it is essential to consider the broader context. The failures resulted from a complex interplay of factors, including mismanagement, lack of transparency, excessive leverage of [non-liquidating accounts](https://www.macdonaldillig.com/our-services/detail/liquidating-non-liquidating-entity-distributions#:~:text=Non%2Dliquidating%20distributions%20are%20distributions,making%20a%20non%2Dliquidating%20distribution.), interconnectedness with Alameda Research and a collapse in confidence. Hence, an understanding of these contributing factors is crucial for preventing future crises and ensuring the long-term sustainability of the crypto industry.

Crypto exchanges serve as digital marketplaces for trading cryptocurrencies, facilitating buying and selling, and for asset storage. A growing concern is the rise of non-liquidating accounts - positions that cannot be liquidated even during market volatility. A non-liquidating account is a specialised brokerage account where the broker does not automatically liquidate positions, even if the account's value falls below the usual margin requirements. These accounts are typically reserved for entities with significant financial stability, such as market makers, institutional investors, large holders of cryptos (often called ‘whales’) and those operating under specific internal policies, so allowing greater flexibility. Unlike regular trading accounts, non-liquidating accounts offer more lenient terms, reflecting the account holder's financial strength or strategic importance. Exchanges provide these accounts to market makers and large traders so as to ensure market stability and liquidity, as these entities require substantial capital to support trading infrastructure and innovative products. In Web 3, exchanges offer non-liquidating accounts to large crypto whales since their trading activity generates significant liquidity and revenue for the exchange.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!izyd!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F43eb2517-6b39-4037-946e-ace87dbb4146_782x776.png)

Source: Teamblockchain Ltd

Non-liquidating crypto accounts allow investors to leverage their assets without the risk of being forced to sell their assets whereby promoting liquidity, reducing withdrawal pressure and increasing trading activity. This flexibility helps preserve future gains, avoid taxable events and manage risk effectively, making them attractive for long-term investments. However, if not properly managed, non-liquidating accounts can mirror the risks of traditional finance, such as fractional reserve banking or even Ponzi schemes - as seen in scandals such as [Mt. Gox](https://fastercapital.com/content/Unmasking-the-Mt--Gox-Scam--Examining-the-Depths-of-Financial-Fraud.html#:~:text=The%20Mt.,%2C%20in%20early%202014%2C%20Mt.), [QuadrigaCX](https://www.pymnts.com/cryptocurrency/2022/pymnts-crypto-crime-series-the-tale-of-quadrigacx-canadas-longest-crypto-ponzi-scheme/) and the FTX saga. Some exchanges might offer features such as ‘negative balance protection’, ‘insurance fund’, ‘margin calls’ or ‘stop-loss protections’. ‘Partial liquidation’, ‘adjustable leverage’, could indicate non-liquidating account mechanisms some one needs to be aware of this. It would be prudent for investors to seek further clarifications from exchanges as regards the quality of these accounts due to FTX using non-liquidating accounts nefariously. These accounts significantly threaten exchange stability and market integrity, potentially leading to investor losses and systemic risks; the inability to liquidate positions can trigger cascading effects, de-stabilising the market. And, whilst the collapse of crypto exchanges such as FTX is often linked to algorithmic stablecoin volatility, the role of non-liquidating accounts is also frequently overlooked:

> · FTX as a crypto exchange was known for its fast, efficient trading platform, liquid market making
> 
> and advanced margin lending. Founded by Sam Bankman-Fried (SBF), FTX stood out for offering some of the best prices and allowing users to borrow against deposits. Its automated risk management system sold collateral automatically when margin limits were breached, without contacting customers. Aside from the woes of its algorithmic coin, non-liquidating accounts could have affected them in the following ways. The revelation that Alameda held [$4.1billion of FTT tokens](https://www.financemagnates.com/cryptocurrency/ftx-and-alamedas-secret-dealings-41b-in-ftt-tokens-transferred-before-bankruptcy/#:~:text=As%20of%20June%2030%2C%20Alameda,by%20%22unlocked%20FTT%20tokens%22.) suggests that these tokens functioned as a form of collateral for loans taken by Alameda.
> 
> · FTX's margin lending business, where customers could borrow against their crypto assets, could
> 
> have created non-liquidating accounts if borrowers were unable to repay their loans.
> 
> · If Alameda's losses were significant enough to threaten its ability to repay loans, FTX might have
> 
> been exposed to hidden liabilities. These liabilities could have taken the form of non-liquidating accounts, where FTX could not recover the full value of the loans.

Essentially, SBF and his associates manipulated FTX's internal controls to facilitate the transfer of funds between FTX and Alameda, thus potentially compromising FTX’s risk management practices and potentially leading to the accumulation of non-liquidating accounts. It has also been [revealed](https://www.sec.gov/files/litigation/complaints/2022/comp-pr2022-219.pdf) that Alameda Research, the exchange's trading arm, had a secret exemption that allowed it to avoid being liquidated - the new CEO of FTX [also confirms this.](https://www.coindesk.com/business/2022/11/17/alameda-had-secret-exemption-from-ftx-liquidation-protocols-new-ceo-says/)

[Some believe](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/antongolub_liquidation-crypto-derivatives-activity-7114568395357835264-cR3n/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=member_android) exchanges with non-liquidating accounts can be spotted “ _by observing a steep drop in Open Interest after(!) a large price move_ ”; a sudden drop in open interest after a significant price move can signal hidden issues with non-liquidating accounts on derivatives exchanges. Exchanges may attempt to cover up losses by offsetting profitable traders' positions against those with negative balances, revealing a shortfall. Web3 should learn from these failures (e.g. FTX) and, to be fair, the many failures of TradFi and it needs to do significantly more to protect its users and community members by not exposing them to unnecessary risks, crucially balancing liquidity provision with responsible risk management. Web3’s decentralised and coded infrastructure contrasts sharply with TradFi’s strict but centralised oversight, which itself often relies on manual reporting and checking. And, whilst TradFi has faced scandals, it has learned from them and thus implemented safeguards. Therefore the crypto industry has a chance to adopt these lessons, ensuring its decentralised infrastructure supports the global economy responsibly in the present and future.

In essence, in order to mitigate the risks posed by non-liquidating accounts, crypto exchanges must adopt stringent risk management protocols, and this entails setting conservative loan-to-value ratios to prevent over-leveraging, especially during volatile market conditions. Transparency is paramount; exchanges should regularly disclose the health of non-liquidating accounts, including collateral levels and exposure to market downturns. Real-time monitoring systems can help detect and address potential risks promptly, so minimising the likelihood of cascading failures. Furthermore, regulators are instrumental in overseeing crypto exchanges to ensure they operate within safe and ethical boundaries. This involves enforcing clear guidelines on the management of non-liquidating accounts, such as mandating regular audits and public reporting. Regulators should also establish a framework for intervention in cases where exchanges fail to manage risks adequately, safeguarding investors from potential losses. By setting and enforcing these standards, regulators contribute to maintaining market trust and preventing future collapses such as those witnessed with Mt. Gox and FTX.
