---
title: "Prediction platforms powered by blockchain technology"
description: "prediction markets, where you bet on real-world events, are on the rise. Blockchain offers a revolutionary approach with transparency and potentially fairer odds, by letting users set them; this empowers informed participation, not merely gambling. Whilst traditional betting uses bookmakers with hidden odds, blockchain's immutability creates a trustworthy system. However, regulations are a hurdle, yet, despite the uncertainty, the future looks bright. Blockchain prediction markets offer a diverse range of applications - from weather to politics - potentially disrupting industries and fostering a more informed public."
date: 2024-08-20
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/prediction-platforms-powered-by-blockchain
year: 2024
---

# Prediction platforms powered by blockchain technology

The first-ever online prediction market was the IEM (Iowa Electronic Markets) in 1988, or “[Iowa Political Stock market](https://mickbransfield.com/2024/01/18/the-last-25-years-of-the-iowa-electronic-markets/)”, which allowed students use real money ($5-$500) in a simulated market to trade contracts on events such as political elections and learn more about finance and politics. Although primarily political, the prediction market had existed before 1988. [Records of papal successor predictions](http://users.wfu.edu/strumpks/papers/Int_Election_Betting_Formatted_FINAL_NoComments.pdf) in 1503 and US elections by 1884 exist. In July 2018, the first decentralised prediction market, [Augur](https://www.alchemy.com/dapps/augur), was launched on the Ethereum blockchain, being based around four functions: creating, trading, reporting and settlement. Whilst often used casually, ‘prediction’, ‘betting’ and ‘wagering’ have their own distinct meanings. A prediction is simply a forecast about the outcome of an event; prediction markets leverage the wisdom of the crowd, where the combined knowledge of many people is often superior to any single expert. This collective intelligence leads to a market price that reflects the true probability of the event happening, making them potentially more accurate than traditional polls. In contrast, traditional betting (sports betting, wagering) involves a bookmaker setting the odds and taking a % of any profits. Participants wager on these pre-determined odds, with a fixed payout regardless of how strong their prediction might be. With prediction markets, however, anyone can contribute to a pool of funds and collectively set the odds for an event. This allows individuals to potentially profit from commissions on winning bets, so fostering a more participatory environment. Indeed, prediction markets have been heralded as more reliable than traditional polling for uncovering the “truth”. The concept is straightforward: participants wager on outcomes they believe will occur, with the risk of financial loss driving them to be as accurate as possible. This profit-driven motivation generates valuable insights into future events and these predictions, in turn, help others understand market trends, make informed decisions, mitigate risks and capitalise on emerging opportunities.

So, can such markets reshape our approach to forecasting and decision-making across various sectors? Traditionally, these betting systems relied on physical locations such as bookmaker shops but the rise of Web2 revolutionised this by creating online betting platforms where the virtual spaces allow individuals to place bets directly, cutting out the middleman and offering a wider variety of wagers. And, all of this convenience is accessible from the comfort of a web browser, 24/7, and tapping into a global market base. But aside, as a broader market, prediction markets extend far beyond sports, encompassing everything from finance and politics to weather patterns and pop culture trends. In 2006, [the Hollywood Stock Exchange](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hollywood_Stock_Exchange) witnessed users predict 94% of the nominees and winners of that year’s Oscar Awards. Hence, it is not simply about who wins the game but about predicting the ever-shifting tides of the world around us. This assimilation of prediction into the internet (now Web3) has not only transformed how we bet but also opened the door for further innovation, paving the way for the rise of blockchain-powered prediction markets.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!9qYz!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F0b0e90ab-3a20-4dec-8120-eccff84852bd_980x604.png)

Source: Teamblockchain

So, whilst blockchain prediction sites are gaining popularity, traditional betting has a more extended history and broader global reach. It is a well-established industry with regulations in place in many countries. Digital betting, on the other hand, is still evolving, and its legal status varies considerably depending on the jurisdiction. Traditional bookmakers rarely lose money in the long run - they achieve this by setting odds that favour them, regardless of the outcome. However, prediction platforms (especially new entrant blockchains) offer a different model where individuals can act as their bookies. And, unlike traditional gambling, which relies on chance, blockchain allows for prediction markets where wagers can be based on calculated risks and transparent odds. This shift empowers users to become more than merely gamblers, transforming them into informed participants in a decentralised global on-line community prediction ecosystem. [Polymarket](https://polymarket.com/), a blockchain prediction market platform for real-world events (elections, Tweets), [raised $45 million](https://sherwood.news/crypto/peter-thiels-founders-fund-makes-a-usd45m-bet-on-crypto-prediction-markets/) from Peter Thiel's Founders - it uses stablecoins and has seen sizeable bets on US elections. However, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) shut it down in 2022, as [DLA Piper](https://www.dlapiper.com/en/insights/publications/2022/1/cftc-settles-enforcement-action-against-defi-platform-polymarket) noted: “ _The CFTC found that the event-based binary option contracts offered on Polymarket’s platform constitute “swaps” under the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA), and that Polymarket’s provision of an unregistered facility or non-designated contract market for the trade of such swaps violated the CEA and related regulations._ ” But, although blockchain offers a revolutionary approach to betting with transparency and potentially fairer odds, the inherent volatility of cryptocurrencies could wreak havoc on the entire system. Imagine placing a bet on your favourite rugby team and having its value swing wildly, based on market fluctuations, before the game even starts! This is therefore one reason that stablecoins are used because they ensure the value wagered stays the same throughout the prediction period. Unsurprisingly, this stability fosters trust and allows the focus to remain on the actual prediction, not the value of the medium of payment being used. Statistician, Nate Silver, known for his election predictions and data analysis, was [recently hired](https://www.coindesk.com/business/2024/07/17/polymarket-hires-nate-silver-after-taking-in-265m-of-bets-on-us-election-report/) as an advisor to Polymarket. Silver's involvement is expected to make Polymarket's forecasts more accurate together with the addition of CFTC’s former head, Christopher Giancarlo, having also been [appointed](https://www.theblock.co/linked/147946/polymarket-appoints-former-cftc-chief-giancarlo-as-chair-of-advisory-board) as the chairman of Polymarket’s advisory board.

Blockchain prediction platforms themselves are a diverse ecosystem (catering to various interests beyond cryptocurrency prices), with some better known platforms which include [Gnosis](https://www.gnosis.io/), [Stox](https://blog.stox.com/), [Delphy](https://members.delphidigital.io/feed/prediction-markets-explained), [BlitzPredict](https://coinmarketcap.com/currencies/blitzpredict/), [Hivemind](https://medium.com/hvmd/tagged/prediction-markets) and [Bodhi](https://api-new.whitepaper.io/documents/pdf?id=H1thTxBZX). These platforms allow users to leverage their knowledge and predict everything from stock market movements and political outcomes to the success of upcoming movies, and even the weather. However, the reach extends further. [Wingman](https://www.alchemy.com/dapps/wingman), for example, focuses specifically on predicting flight delays - a niche but valuable application of this technology. This variety demonstrates the potential of prediction markets to disrupt various industries by offering a decentralised and potentially more efficient way to forecast future events, and even present an alternative to the insurance sector. Platforms such as PredictIt and Kalshi now allow users to wager real money (USD) on the outcomes of real-world events, and this has even caught the eye of established players. Meanwhile, Interactive Brokers, a prominent online brokerage firm, is launching its prediction market called "[ForecastEx](http://forecastex.com/)” and, giant in the trading world, [Susquehanna](https://sig.com/), is going a step further by forming a dedicated team specifically for Kalshi. However, Kalshi and PredictIt are currently in a legal battle with the CFTC which itself has proposed rules that ban specific prediction contracts, including some based on sensitive real-world events e.g., elections. Certainly, this legal battle highlights the ongoing debate surrounding regulation and the potential risks involved in these markets and, in the CFTC’s fight, the blockchain prediction market falls under the event contracts market. But, has this inelegance been offered to binary options, which trade legally on regulated exchanges or DCMs (designated contract markets)?

Essentially, despite the massive potential, and with over $1 billion having been [wagered on the 2024US presidential election](https://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/gaming/2020/11/02/2020-election-betting-odds-donald-trump-joe-biden/6128882002/) alone, the industry faces regulatory hurdles. But, unlike traditional prediction markets, blockchain-based platforms offer a more transparent and secure system, and so by leveraging distributed ledger technology, blockchain prediction platforms could potentially address some of the regulatory concerns that traditional betting organisations face. Transactions are recorded immutably on a blockchain, ensuring traceability and reducing the risk of manipulation and additionally, smart contracts can automate payouts based on predefined conditions, further enhancing the system's reliability. Prediction markets offer a novel way to engage with current events and potentially earn a profit. So, whilst regulatory hurdles exist, blockchain technology presents a compelling solution for building a more transparent and secure future for this domain. Blockchain prediction markets have the potential to not only revolutionise how we wager but also foster a more informed and engaged ecosystems for all of those who wish to be involved in buying and selling predictions from the comfort of their home.
