---
title: "DeFi impact on agriculture "
description: "Decentralized finance, or DeFi, has acquired considerable attention in several industries because it promises to lower intermediaries, boost transparency and democratise access to financial services. With its intricate supply networks and economic requirements, agriculture is a vital industry that is set to benefit greatly from DeFi advances. DeFi's potential to reshape agriculture raises exciting possibilities, so are we ready for this transformation?"
date: 2024-06-27
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/defi-impact-on-agriculture
year: 2024
---

# DeFi impact on agriculture 

The term ‘[decentralized finance' (or DeFi](https://thepaymentsassociation.org/article/decentralized-finance-defi-revolutionizing-the-financial-landscape-through-blockchain-technology/)) represents a shift from traditional, centralized financial institutions to peer-to-peer lending facilitated by decentralized blockchain technology. DeFi platforms function without the need for intermediaries such as banks or financial institutions, enabling individuals to access financial services directly over the internet, regardless of their location. This concept is not only innovative but also highly pertinent in the current digital age, where efficiency and transparency are particularly valued. DeFi, has become a disruptive force in the financial industry by using blockchain technology to build open, permissionless and global financial ecosystems. As an essential sector with a significant worldwide economic impact, agriculture has several obstacles, e.g. difficulty obtaining financing, inefficient supply systems and susceptibility to hazards such as climate change. But DeFi integration into agriculture offers a possible way to overcome these obstacles, transforming supply chains and farming financing and can provide new innovate technology-based tools to help address these long-standing issues. Farmers may now interact directly with buyers and suppliers of financial services anywhere in the world by utilising smart contracts and digital money, many of the traditional brokers, agents and other intermediaries who are usually involved in complex distribution and supply chains potentially are no longer required. Historically, conventional agricultural supply chains have frequently been rife with inefficiencies and opaqueness. The food supply chain encompasses a wide range of stakeholders, from farmers to grocery stores, and each link adds layers of complexity and the possibility of delays and errors. Additionally, small-scale farmers in developing nations face significant obstacles, such as limited access to markets and financial services which further complicates the food supply landscape. Farmers often face difficulties accessing traditional financing due to high collateral requirements, lengthy approval processes and high interest rates. Smallholder farmers, in particular, are disproportionately affected whereby limiting their ability to invest in better inputs, technology and expansion.

**DeFi solutions:**

> · **decentralized lending platforms** \- farmers may use digital assets as collateral to obtain loans through platforms such as [MakerDAO](https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/cryptocurrency/what-is-makerdao-and-dai/), Compound and Aave. For instance, a Kenyan farmer may get a [stablecoin loan](https://www.circle.com/en/digital-dollar-stablecoin-solutions-for-defi) by using Ethereum as collateral on Aave and completely avoiding the local banking system.
> 
> · **peer-to-peer (P2P) lending** \- DeFi makes it easier for people to lend to one another directly. Global lenders are able to give money directly to farmers through platforms such as [EthLend](https://defiprime.com/ethlend) and Dharma, frequently at more affordable interest rates. For instance, a P2P network may allow a US lender to lend money to Colombian coffee growers, enabling them to modernise their equipment.
> 
> · **tokenised assets** \- through the process of [tokenisation, farmers may turn assets (such as potential crop yields) into digital tokens](https://blockapps.net/blog/agricultural-commodities-on-the-blockchain-what-investors-should-know/#:~:text=Overview%20of%20RWA%20Tokenization%20in%20the%20Agricultural%20Sector,-Real%2Dworld%20assets&text=In%20the%20context%20of%20agriculture,livestock%2C%20and%20other%20farm%20assets.) that can be sold or utilised as collateral. This novel finance mechanism offers investment options and instant liquidity. For instance, a French vineyard may tokenise its impending wine harvest and offer investors tokens in exchange for quick cash flow.

Supply networks for agriculture are usually lengthy intricate and opaque, making it difficult to trace items from farm to table due which can raise questions about food safety and authenticity. The plethora of multiple intermediaries increases costs and the time it takes to process and handle the movement of food stuff, thus lowering productivity and farmer income. This can result in both farmers and the end consumer being subject to fraud resulting from an inability to confirm the provenance and quality of a product. DeFi offers a number of solutions by automating supply chain operations, such as payments and delivery confirmations. These self-executing contracts that have the terms of the agreement explicitly encoded into code can eliminate the need for middlemen and guarantee accurate, timely transactions. End-to-end agricultural product traceability is possible by using sensors and the deployment of internet of things (IoT) and blockchain-powered platforms such as [VeChain](https://vechain.org/) and [IBM Food Trust](https://www.ibm.com/products/supply-chain-intelligence-suite/food-trust). A blockchain can record every stage of the product's lifecycle, increasing transparency and trust, and fostering customer confidence. For instance, a German consumer may view a tomato's entire journey from an organic farm in Italy by scanning its QR code. Furthermore, DeFi powered platforms can be used to enable farmers to sell their goods directly to customers so reducing their dependency on intermediaries and boosting the farmers’ profit margins. The availability of digital money options as a payment method makes cross-border transactions faster and cheaper.

Traditionally,**** the agriculture industry has faced a variety of hazards, such as severe weather, pests and changes in market prices. Conventional insurance methods are frequently found wanting for small farmers, insurance rates may be unaffordable and often the process of making a claim can take a long time which delays the provision of critical assistance. The result is that many farmers, particularly those in underdeveloped nations, lack access to insurance services. DeFi can provide solutions, such as [Ethererisc](https://www.etherisc.com/) offering [parametric insurance](https://content.naic.org/insurance-topics/parametric-disaster-insurance#:~:text=The%20term%20parametric%20insurance%20describes,in%20a%20traditional%20indemnity%20policy.) which automates payouts based on predetermined triggers (such as weather occurrences). This paradigm guarantees prompt, equitable and transparent claims. Farmers can also acquire weather derivatives on DeFi platforms to protect their crop revenue from climatic risks and hedge against unfavourable weather circumstances. DeFi solutions can offer farmers the ability to protect themselves from price fluctuations by [tokenising their crops](https://www.agriut.org/post/how-can-small-holder-farmers-benefit-from-a-digital-token). DeFi exchanges allow for the trading of these tokens, offering liquidity (i.e., a secondary market) and a way to control financial risks. As an illustration, Brazilian soybean farmers may tokenise a piece of their upcoming harvest in order to raise money in advance by selling tokens to investors. According to [Afi](https://www.afi-global.org/newsroom/blogs/why-farmer-financial-inclusion-matters/): “ _Smallholder farmers produce over 30 percent of the world’s food supply and support nearly 500 million livelihoods globally. Yet they still struggle to access basic financial services like credit, savings, insurance, and digital transfers – a worrying reality considering our dependence on them for survival. Smallholder farmers lack formal identification and the credit history and collateral needed to qualify for loans. They’re often based in remote areas with limited connectivity and have lower levels of digital financial literacy.”_ However**,** thanks to mobile-friendly DeFi software, farmers may now access financial services without relying on a traditional banking infrastructure. This is especially helpful in areas where there are many mobile phone users but few traditional financial services providers. For instance, a mobile DeFi app would allow a remote Ghanaian cocoa farmer to have immediate access to savings accounts, loans and investment options. DeFi can facilitate the development of community-based financial services such as cooperative [lending and savings pools](https://medium.com/@Huge_Partners/how-defi-can-benefit-individuals-and-communities-in-africa-68f775ca6abd), allowing farmers to manage their money more skilfully and collaboratively. For example, a group of Bangladeshi farmers may establish a digital savings pool and use smart contracts to allocate loans and manage cash. By combining DeFi with microfinance programs, financial services may reach the most marginalised farmers and provide them with the opportunity to savings, investments products and services, as well as credit at reasonable rates - all of which historically have been unavailable to them.

Many of the long-standing issues that farmers have, such as risk management, inefficient supply chains, restricted access to financing and financial inclusion, may be resolved by incorporating DeFi into agriculture. Through the utilisation of smart contracts and blockchain technology, DeFi can establish an agricultural ecosystem that is more inclusive, transparent and efficient. If the farming sector continues to advance, its use of these technologies has the potential to improve the livelihoods of many and greatly increase global food security. A more lucrative and sustainable agricultural economy is promised by the effective deployment of DeFi solutions which will shape the future of farming financing and supply chains and also raise some thought-provoking questions. What if supply chains were fully transparent? DeFi's blockchain technology ensures every step from farm to table is traceable, so reducing costs and enhancing food safety. Could this transparency lead to fairer prices for farmers and consumers? And, how about smarter risk management? DeFi introduces parametric insurance, offering fast payouts triggered by specific events, and also crop tokenisation to hedge against market volatility. Could these innovations protect farmers from financial ruin? Finally, can DeFi democratise financial services for smallholder farmers? And, with mobile-friendly apps providing access to savings, loans and investments - even in remote areas - is this the key to improving productivity and resilience in agriculture? DeFi's potential to reshape agriculture raises exciting possibilities, so are we ready for this transformation?
