---
title: "Tokenization of deposits: trends, challenges and potential "
description: "Tokenized deposits are set to reshape banking assets into digital tokens using blockchain technology, whereby ensuring security and transparency. Major global banking titans such as Citi and JP Morgan are participating in initiatives exploring multi-asset settlement, being overseen by regulatory bodies. Regulatory involvement extends to central bank digital currency (CBDC) trials indicating the trend's significance, but with challenges including regulatory compliance and liquidity concerns; initiatives such as the UK Regulated Liability Network aim to address these. Tokenized deposits offer advantages over stablecoins, supported by institutional backing and regulatory clarity; they promise to transform wholesale markets, enabling seamless transactions and bolstering investor confidence in a future of borderless financial services."
date: 2024-06-18
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/tokenization-of-deposits-trends-challenges-674
year: 2024
---

# Tokenization of deposits: trends, challenges and potential 

Tokenization signifies the conversion of real assets into a digital representation, made available in the form of a token - a trend revolutionizing the financial domain by boosting liquidity and accessibility. And amongst these advancements, [tokenized deposits](https://www.oliverwyman.com/our-expertise/insights/2023/feb/deposit-token-a-foundation-for-stable-digital-money.html) stand out as a significant innovation. These deposits are undergoing a metamorphosis, transitioning conventional banking assets into digital tokens with the aid of blockchain technology. Furthermore, unlike regular transactions, tokenized deposits rely on blockchain's decentralized ledger for security and transparency; this, itself, not only streamlines financial procedures but also encourages greater compatibility and efficiency within the digital marketplace. Head of Macro Policy Research at State Street Global Advisors, Elliot Hentoff, believes that: “ _The history of technological innovation in finance has been toward increased liquidity, fractionalisation of assets and expanding capital markets. In this regard, tokenisation is another innovation that supports market evolution in line with its predecessors. The long-term vision of asset tokenisation would enable a broader set of market participants by lowering barriers to entry for investors; create more fungibility across asset classes with fewer intermediaries; and by extension, improve liquidity in large parts of global capital markets_.”

Unsurprisingly, in the realm of tokenization, [major players](https://www.finextra.com/newsarticle/44116/us-fs-giants-explore-multi-asset-settlement-using-share-ledger-tech) are shaping the landscape of deposit token initiatives. For example, in the US, leading financial institutions such as Citi, JP Morgan and Visa are actively participating in a regulated settlement network (RSN) proof-of-concept (PoC). Overseen by the regulatory agency Sifma - and with involvement from Swift, Mastercard, TD Bank and others - the PoC aims to explore multi-asset settlement using shared ledger technology. Specifically, it investigates settling tokenized commercial bank money, wholesale central bank money, US Treasury securities and other tokenized assets on a 24/7, programmable shared ledger. Meanwhile, central banks and regulatory bodies are deeply involved in overseeing and experimenting with tokenized deposits. For instance, the [Bank of Spain](https://www.ledgerinsights.com/adhara-wins-bank-of-spain-contract-for-wholesale-cbdc-tokenized-deposit-trials/) recently awarded contracts for wholesale central bank digital currency (CBDC) trials and Adhara (the technology partner of Fnality) secured a contract to develop a wholesale CBDC infrastructure alongside a consortium involving Cecabank and Abanca, focusing on wholesale CBDC for securities settlement. Adhara's project includes the delivery of a ‘digital interbank orchestration platform’ potentially hinting at a tokenized deposit solution.

Interestingly, when it comes to putting fiat money on-chain, most people think of stablecoins and CBDCs, but deposit tokens may prove to be more effective - and more transformational. In November 2023, Fnality International announced a new $95 million funding round led by Goldman Sachs and BNP Paribas, marking the rise of ["deposit tokens"](https://www.sygnum.com/future-finance/crypto/why-you-need-to-pay-attention-to-deposit-tokens/) as a viable means of representing fiat money on blockchains. And, for anyone interested in the mainstream adoption of institutional DeFi, then deposit tokens are worth some attention. However, despite a number of initiatives in a variety of jurisdictions, for some, the adoption of tokenized deposits has not been a fast as hoped. As reported by [Reuters](https://www.reuters.com/business/finance/banks-drive-tokenise-assets-moves-slower-than-expected-2024-06-05/), Ryan Rugg, Head of Digital Assets at Citibank's has commented that “ _it's taken longer than I expected, to be honest, to get to the point where we are in this space."_ However, Rugg appears to still be optimistic, since “ _a tokenized deposit can be sent 24/7, 365 days a year, avoiding cut-offs in different time zones or for banking holidays.”_

Tokenizing deposits brings [multifaceted benefits](https://www.sygnum.com/future-finance/crypto/why-you-need-to-pay-attention-to-deposit-tokens/), so enhancing financial ecosystems. [Historical examples](https://www.bis.org/publ/bisbull73.pdf) have revealed risks of monetary singleness breakdown - as seen in the free banking era's discounted private banknotes. Conversely, the non-bearer instrument model prevents such risks by restricting token transfer outside KYC boundaries; it mirrors current monetary practices, ensuring compliance and transparency in transactions. Access to the lender of last resort for non-banks (alongside regulation) enhances financial inclusivity and, despite varying credit risks, private tokenized money under this model still reaps tokenization benefits. Furthermore, this simplifies payments, eliminates external messaging needs and bolsters transactional efficiency. Efficiency and speed improve with automated payment operations enabled by programmable tokens, and instant, atomic settlement reduces transaction time and counterparty risk. The 24/7 availability that a blockchain-powered platform offers ensures seamless transactions at any time, and interoperability with traditional financial systems fosters connectivity between decentralized and traditional finance. Regulatory safeguards ensure compliance (enhancing trust and reliability), and with diverse use cases spanning domestic and cross-border payments, trading and collateral provision, then deposit tokens offer versatility. Moreover, being issued by regulated banks, they boast stability and reliability - unlike some digital currencies. Likewise, integration into existing legal frameworks ensures compatibility with established systems, so streamlining adoption. In essence, tokenized deposits revolutionize finance, blending innovation with regulatory compliance for enhanced competitiveness and efficiency.

**Tokenized deposits attracting Hong Kong Monetary Authority attentions**

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!nvdU!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fa16a9675-2ebf-4ecc-a15f-3ac85a147171_516x500.png)

Source:[ X](https://twitter.com/ChadSteingraber/status/1781324482898022559)

However, the tokenization of deposits introduces [several complex challenges](https://www.deltecbank.com/news-and-insights/tokenization-truly-disrupts/) that must be addressed for its widespread adoption and success. One key challenge lies in regulatory compliance, as companies operating across different regions must navigate varying legal frameworks, so adding layers of complexity to their operations. Additionally, liquidity concerns arise with tokenized assets, which may lack the tradability and exchangeability necessary for transactions to be executed quickly and capital raising and hence impact both investors and businesses alike. Furthermore, investor protection becomes a critical issue since tokenized assets may not offer the same level of safeguards as traditional securities - potentially increasing the risk of fraud and abuse within the system. Interoperability emerges as another significant challenge because integrating different blockchain platforms and traditional financial systems requires standardization, which is currently lacking in the industry. Moreover, the adoption of tokenization faces resistance due to unfamiliarity or misunderstanding of the technology, thus slowing down its industry-wide acceptance.

In the backdrop of these challenges, the [Economic Crime and Corporate Transparency Act 2023](https://bills.parliament.uk/bills/3339) in the UK has stirred controversy by granting extensive powers to law enforcement (i.e. the police), allowing digital assets to be seized and destroyed without due process. This heavy-handed approach, targeting both cryptocurrencies and other digital assets, reflects the government's urgency to crack down on crypto-related crimes. And, whilst proponents argue that such measures are necessary to combat illicit activities, they have [sparked heated debates](https://www.ccn.com/news/crypto/uk-crypto-laws-force-police-seizing-crypto/) on privacy rights (citing infringements on freedom) and potentially will stifle innovation in the digital asset sector. Moreover, the impact on investors is palpable, with limited options due to regulatory constraints. The UK’s plans to introduce further clarity have no doubt been put on hold, given an election is to be held in July 2024. Nevertheless, initiatives such as the [UK Regulated Liability Network (RLN](https://www.ukfinance.org.uk/news-and-insight/press-release/uk-finance-announces-new-regulated-liability-network-experimentation)) have been launched. This collaborative effort involves leading financial institutions and technology partners to explore the potential of tokenized commercial bank deposits in real-world scenarios. Within wholesale markets, tokenized deposits emerge as an intriguing substitute for stablecoins, supported by the innovative vision of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) for a revolutionary financial system, dubbed the ["Finternet"](https://fintechnews.ch/blockchain_bitcoin/bis-proposes-vision-for-new-financial-system-built-around-tokenization-and-platforms/70607/). This concept envisages an interconnected network of financial ecosystems, harnessing tokenization and unified ledgers to transform financial services on a global scale.

Tokenized deposits offer distinct advantages over stablecoins - notably direct backing by traditional deposits and regulatory clarity supported by institutional endorsement. The BIS's Finternet proposes a token-based financial system underpinned by unified ledgers, enabling seamless transactions and heightened security whilst reducing reliance on intermediaries. This innovative approach streamlines asset trading, enhances transparency and simplifies compliance processes therefore aligning with the evolving needs of wholesale markets. Moreover, the BIS highlights the transformative capacity of tokenization and artificial intelligence (AI) in tackling persistent issues within the financial industry. Through facilitating quicker transactions, cutting costs and broadening access to financial services, tokenization stands out as a crucial technology propelling the Finternet's aspiration for inclusive and effective financial ecosystems. Conversely, stablecoins frequently navigate within a regulatory ambiguity, encountering uncertainty concerning their legal standing and supervision. Additionally, tokenized deposits possess the capability to surpass stablecoins in wholesale markets because of their intrinsic stability and dependability.

Subsequently, in scenarios where swift transactions and capital raising are paramount, tokenized deposits offer a viable alternative to stablecoins so offering greater liquidity and ease of use. Current trends indicate a growing interest in tokenized assets, with initiatives such as the UK Regulated Liability Network paving the way for their widespread adoption. Looking ahead, tokenized deposits are poised to revolutionize wholesale markets, thus providing a seamless and efficient means of transferring financial assets whilst addressing regulatory concerns and enhancing investor confidence. For this reason, these initiatives are setting the stage for a future where financial services transcend borders - empowering both individuals and businesses around the world.
