---
title: "Regulatory sandboxes and blockchain innovation"
description: "Regulatory sandboxes offer a controlled environment for blockchain start-ups to innovate whilst operating under relaxed regulations. Many jurisdictions have used sandboxes to foster advancements in areas such as tokenised assets, decentralised finance and cross-border payments. These sandboxes help regulators learn about emerging technologies and refine rules whilst allowing companies to test products with minimal risk. However, challenges persist, particularly with blockchain’s decentralised nature and global reach, making it difficult to transition from sandbox experimentation to full-scale compliance. The balancing act between fostering innovation and ensuring regulatory oversight remains crucial for blockchain’s future."
date: 2024-10-22
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/regulatory-sandboxes-and-blockchain
year: 2024
---

# Regulatory sandboxes and blockchain innovation

In the UK, the FCA was the first financial service regulator in 2015 to launch a sandbox as part of its “Project Innovate”. Essentially, when policymakers set up a regulatory sandbox, they make it possible for fintech and blockchain start-ups to test their new ideas in a safe space with less strict rules. This usually means getting brief exemptions from some of the rules set by regulators, having regulators closely watch the product and only letting a few real customers use it. The sandbox model also allows companies to work without worrying about getting into hot water for breaking strict rules, which gives them the chance to come up with new ideas and improve their products. Furthermore, it also helps officials learn more about new technologies, make better rules and ensure that new products are safe for customers before they are made more widely available to people. [Fintech start-up, Nivaura](https://www.harringtonstarr.com/resources/blog/nivaura-technology-deployed-by-dbs-bank-for-worlds-first-fully-digitalised-bond-issuance-platform/), used blockchain technology and within the UK FCA sandbox the company could test its blockchain-based bond issue system; this helped improve the legal framework for tokenised assets. The FCA’s sandbox has been very successful with about 40% of companies moving on to larger market activities - it lets the FCA work directly with innovators, making it easier to create regulatory rules for blockchain technologies that are both flexible and strong.

**Selection of jurisdictions that have established sandboxes**

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!iGJc!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F63c6d696-9e4b-415a-95e3-fb033c999013_1010x564.png)

Source: Teamblockchain

Blockchain technology has a good deal of promise in many areas, especially in finance, healthcare, supply chains and government services. It is known for being decentralised, open and safe. But because blockchain is decentralised, there are challenges in some countries with its existing directive regarding ensuring data privacy, money laundering and individual accountability when problems occur in a firm that is regulated. However, regulatory sandboxes can help blockchain foster innovation because they offer a safe controlled environment in which blockchain start-ups can try their decentralised solutions (such as smart contracts or tokenised assets) without having to worry about immediately following all the rules. Regulatory bodies can then determine what risks there might be for consumers by experimenting with blockchain applications in a controlled and restricted way. When start-ups and regulators work together in sandboxes, both sides gain. Regulators learn useful things about how blockchain technologies work - which helps them make better and more effective rules - whilst innovation can foster and develop new, more efficient, faster and cheaper methods of doing business. New blockchain-powered platforms can also be tried in sandboxes to ascertain how well they work at reaching people who historically have been excluded from dealing with regulated firms. This can make banks, insurance companies and assets managers more available to wider audience without putting customers at risk. It is therefore not surprising that many other countries have copied the UK and established their own regulatory sandboxes. Singapore is a centre for fintech around the world and thes [Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS)](https://www.dowjones.com/professional/risk/glossary/regulatory-bodies/monetary-authority-singapore/) has been supportive of blockchain through its governing sandbox whereby encouraging innovation across the Asia-Pacific region; blockchain companies have trialled cross-border payments, digital currencies and [decentralised finance (DeFi)](https://www.coinbase.com/learn/crypto-basics/what-is-defi) options in the MAS sandbox. One example is [Project Ubin](https://consensys.io/blockchain-use-cases/finance/project-ubin), a group effort led by MAS which looked into how blockchain could be used for cross-border payments in more than one currency. Project Ubin successfully showed that [distributed ledger technology (DLT)](https://www.techtarget.com/searchcio/definition/distributed-ledger#:~:text=Distributed%20ledger%20technology%20\(DLT\)%20is,data%20store%20or%20administration%20functionality.) could be used to make cross-border payments more cheaply and more efficiently - the sandbox gave MAS and the involved firms a safe place to try out complicated legal and technical issues.

In 2016, [Australia's Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) ](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/a/australian-securities-and-investments-commission-asic.asp)opened a legal sandbox to encourage new ideas in fintech and blockchain. Companies working on blockchain-based payment systems, insurance products and identity verification technologies can use the sandbox as a safe place to test their goods. The ASIC sandbox was used by [AgriDigital](https://www.agridigital.io/) (a blockchain-based tool for managing grain supply lines) to test the tokenisation of agricultural goods. The platform allows buyers and sellers to trade and pay for goods on a blockchain, which lowers counterparty risk and makes the supply chain clearer and blockchain is being used more in agriculture, supply chains and the financial industry thanks to [ASIC's sandbox](https://openlegal.com.au/what-is-asics-enhanced-regulatory-sandbox/). Furthermore, the government has learnt fundamental lessons concerning the writing of those rules that work with blockchain whilst still keeping financial markets safe and stable. Meanwhile, when the [Abu Dhabi Global Market (ADGM)](https://wired.me/business/abu-dhabi-global-market/) opened its fintech regulatory lab in 2018, blockchain start-ups from all over the world came to use it. Essentially, it has a loose set of rules that lets blockchain companies try out solutions in areas such as digital identity verification, tokenised assets and decentralised finance. One of the groups in ADGM's sandbox is [Securrency](https://www.valtech.com/work/securrency/), a blockchain-based platform that has designs on turning standard financial instruments into tokens. Securrency was able to try its solution for tokenising securities whilst following existing financial rules by using ADGM's regulatory sandbox. And Switzerland - known as the "Crypto Valley" for its blockchain-friendly regulations - has certainly pioneered blockchain. A regulatory sandbox of the [Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority (FINMA)](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/compliance/regulatory/offering-finma-switzerland) supports fintech innovation, including blockchain. Blockchain and crypto businesses can test their products and services in FINMA's sandbox without regulatory scrutiny if customer funds do not exceed CHF 1 million. [AMINA Bank](https://aminagroup.com/), formerly known as SEBA Bank (a regulated cryptocurrency and blockchain bank), participated in FINMA's sandbox. The bank tested its unique business model, which lets customers store, trade and manage crypto assets, alongside standard financial products, in the sandbox. Moreover, the bank became one of the first crypto banks to get a full banking and securities dealer licence from FINMA after succeeding in the sandbox. This sandbox has also allowed initial coin offerings and asset tokenisation under regulatory direction, positioning Switzerland as a blockchain-based financial innovation hotspot.

However, whilst regulatory sandboxes are good for fostering innovation, they do also experience some problems - it can be hard to fully test blockchain applications, especially ones that work across the globe or are decentralised. Although sandboxes offer short-term freedom from some regulations, the long-term regulations in many countries (especially when using technologies such as blockchain and AI) are still not clear. Start-ups then face the challenge of transitioning from being in a “sandbox” to being required to follow all the rules and regulations. Furthermore, both regulators and those firms looking to experiment in a sandbox need a significant number of resources to set up and effectively function a regulatory sandbox; some start-ups may find it hard to meet even the less strict legal requirements in the sandbox. Yet regulatory sandboxes have undoubtedly become a crucial catalyst for blockchain innovation, providing start-ups with the opportunity to experiment under reduced regulatory oversight. And this ‘safe space’ fosters creativity, allowing companies to push boundaries whilst regulators observe and learn from emerging technologies, e.g. blockchain. Whilst sandboxes enable breakthrough solutions, such as tokenized assets and decentralised finance, they also expose the need for regulators to strike a delicate balance between encouraging innovation and ensuring consumer protection. Countries such as the UK, Singapore and Switzerland have embraced the sandbox model, so empowering firms to revolutionise financial systems, cross-border payments and supply chain management through blockchain. However, blockchain’s decentralised nature and cross-border functionality can complicate regulatory frameworks, making it difficult to scale innovations beyond the sandbox environment.

So, the question remains: Can regulators keep pace with the rapid evolution of blockchain whilst safeguarding against risks, and how can start-ups seamlessly transition from experimental sandboxes to full regulatory compliance? Certainly, this tension between innovation and regulation is at the heart of blockchain's future, raising thought-provoking questions about the role of governments in shaping the digital economies of tomorrow.
