---
title: "The UK is a leading FinTech market: it now needs to embrace digital assets"
description: "Written by Charles McManus, CEO Clear.Bank. The UK has emerged as a dominant force in global FinTech, securing its position through robust investment and innovation attracting talent and funding. Emerging technologies such as blockchain and digital assets further enhance its appeal but with challenges, including regulatory barriers and the need for broader incentives. The UK's ability to maintain its lead amidst global competition hinges on innovation and regulatory adaptability, shaping the future of financial services and digital economies worldwide."
date: 2024-08-28
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/the-uk-is-a-leading-fintech-market
year: 2024
---

# The UK is a leading FinTech market: it now needs to embrace digital assets

[The United Kingdom has solidified its leading status in FinTech](https://www.financemagnates.com/fintech/british-fintech-startups-raise-14b-reclaim-throne-as-top-vc-destination/?utm_source=FMnewsletter&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=17.04.24) by becoming the primary choice for this sector, with 134 technology unicorns in the last ten years whereby exceeding the combined totals of France and Germany. Despite economic headwinds, the UK has remained resilient and appealing to investors, sustaining its leadership. During the initial quarter of 2024, the FinTech industry in the UK successfully secured $1.4 billion in funding through 73 funding rounds, adding to a total of $3.9 billion raised by British start-ups within this timeframe. The UK's FinTech sector benefits from a robust regulatory framework and plentiful access to capital, boosted by initiatives such as the Financial Conduct Authority's sandbox program which fosters innovation while maintaining regulatory integrity. The Bank of England has also been supportive, creating the [Digital Securities Sandbox for tokenised assets](https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/paper/2024/dp/the-boes-approach-to-innovation-in-money-and-payments#:~:text=The%20Bank%20and%20the%20Financial,in%20a%20safe%20regulatory%20environment.) and so helping UK businesses to foster innovation in a safe and controlled manner.

This supportive environment has propelled the UK to a prominent position, driving global FinTech innovation. Indeed, many other jurisdictions have copied the UK regulators and established their own sandboxes. There are substantial investments in research and development highlighting the UK's dedication to nurturing FinTech innovation and expansion, with projected R&D expenditures quadrupling to [£20 billion by 2025](https://www.northrow.com/blog/what-makes-the-uk-one-of-the-best-locations-for-fintech-companies-4-fintech-leaders-share-their-take). FinTech innovation also offers access to outstanding talent and expertise nationwide, complemented by progressive regulatory policies that foster innovation. The availability of capital and proximity to an innovative financial services sector enhance its appeal. In 2022, the UK boasted a [population of over 3,200 FinTech companies](https://www.theglobalcity.uk/fintech), demonstrating continuous growth since 2017 and attracting over 800 international FinTech enterprises. London was the site for half of the top ten European FinTech transactions, underscoring the City of London’s position as a major global financial hub. London also boasts over [350,000 software developers](https://www.zdnet.com/article/london-is-still-top-for-software-developers-but-european-rivals-are-catching-up-fast/) (more than any other European city) and offers unparalleled access to talent and resources. With a 71% FinTech adoption rate, well above the global average of 64%, the UK leads in driving financial innovation. Looking ahead, the UK's focus on sustainable growth models, purpose-driven innovation and emerging technologies, such as AI and machine learning, positions it for continued success as a global FinTech leader.

**Blockchain and Digital Assets in the UK**

The UK's FinTech sector, with over 1,600 firms, is [expected to double by 2030](https://www.trade.gov/country-commercial-guides/united-kingdom-financial-technology-fintech#:~:text=The%20FinTech%20sector%20in%20the,jobs%20to%20the%20UK%20economy); it contributes $13.4 billion (£11 billion) to the economy and supports over 76,000 jobs. This growth presents opportunities for innovative US FinTech solutions and partnerships with major financial institutions with key hubs beyond London. Some start-up firms using blockchain technology and digital asset companies in the UK are offering solutions to meet the challenges around using smart contracts and integrating AI into blockchain-powered platforms whilst others are more focused on developing services for the use in Cloud, for Chatbots or for working with IoT, AR/VR. But one of the key challenges facing many jurisdictions is cost of compliance when it comes to financial crime. In the UK, it is estimated that this costs financial firms [£34.2billion](https://www.thebanker.com/The-cost-of-financial-crime-compliance-in-the-UK-1676974013#:~:text=%C2%A334.2%20billion%20is%20almost,threats%20to%20its%20national%20security.) per year and to put this in context, in 2021/2022, the UK government spent [£45.9billion](https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/defence-departmental-resources-2022/mod-departmental-resources-2022#:~:text=Defence%20spending%20calculations%20are%20set,when%20compared%20to%202020%2F21) on its UK defence. Meanwhile, the UK FinTech sector is tackling AML and KYC challenges head-on through innovation and collaboration. AI and blockchain are at the forefront, driving real-time fraud detection and secure transaction records. Digital identity verification is cutting onboarding times, while RegTech solutions automate compliance, keeping pace with evolving regulations. By blending cutting-edge tech with strategic regulatory partnerships, this hopefully not only enhances security but positions the UK as a global leader in financial innovation and an attractive home for FinTech firms.

**Adoption of Digital Assets in the UK**

In the UK, the English and Welsh Law Commission has helped to clarify the position of digital assets and, in February 2024, it published a draft Property (Digital Assets) Bill (the Bill). The law firm, [Travers Smith](https://www.traverssmith.com/knowledge/knowledge-container/the-law-commissions-approach-to-digital-assets-as-property-the-devil-is-in-the-detail/), highlighted: _“The Bill is the product of important and extensive work undertaken by the Law Commission on the status and nature of digital assets as "property", including its final report on digital assets (published in June 2023). Clause 1 of the Bill is the central provision. Establishing legal certainty around the treatment of digital assets as "property" will pave the way for the increased issuance, trading, clearing and settlement of such assets in the financial markets, and support their use as collateral.”_ The Investment Association, which represents over [250 asset managers with £7.8trillion](https://www.theia.org/sites/default/files/2024-03/Further%20Fund%20Tokenisation%20-%20Achieving%20IF3%20Through%20Collaboration%20%20Mar24.pdf) undermanagement, issued a report in March 2024 and Michelle Scrimgeour, Chair and CEO at Legal & General Investment Management, noted: _“As a global leader in asset management, and with a vibrant fintech and professional services ecosystem, the UK is ideally placed to thrive in the emerging digital marketplace of the future. As we concluded in the first phase, fund tokenisation is set to be a key driver of this success, enabling firms to improve efficiency, enhance client service, and create new products and markets.”_ Several asset managers have already tokenised their Money Market Funds and this trend is set to continue, which is likely to increase the need for digital payments, custody and further secondary trading venues - opportunities for innovative UK FinTech firms to capitalise on. In parallel, Lloyds of London has introduced [innovative insurance solutions tailored for digital assets and blockchain firms](https://www.ledgerinsights.com/blockchain-parametric-insurer-otonomi-logistics-delay-cover/). Blockchain technology is being used to enable parametric insurance policies to offer automated cargo delay insurance whereby streamlining claim processes and reducing pay out times from 45 days to just 45 minutes. This novel approach targets the supply chain sector, benefiting freight forwarders and addressing key industry challenges.

The UK stands at the forefront of FinTech innovation and, as the UK's FinTech sector grows, it faces both opportunities and challenges including regulatory barriers and the need for broader eligibility for incentives. Furthermore, integrating blockchain and digital assets into traditional financial services reflects a broader trend of technological advancement. So, will the UK maintain its lead amidst global competition, embracing innovation and fostering regulatory adaptability? And how might this evolution reshape the future landscape of financial services and digital economies worldwide? The UK's collaborative approach, supported by innovative minds, policymakers and robust funding opportunities, has positioned it as a world-leading FinTech hub, driving business innovation today and into the future. To ensure future progress it is therefore crucial to maintain a forward-thinking approach, forging alliances with international counterparts and key industry stakeholders in order to foster the global adoption of digital assets. By embracing a co-operative mindset, these can pave the way for a cohesive, secure and innovative financial ecosystem that leverages the full potential of digital technologies.
