---
title: "TRON's rise to dominance and the future of its stablecoin "
description: "Circle, the second-largest stablecoin issuer, discontinued minting USDC on the TRON network in the first weeks of 2024. Binance followed suit by terminating USDC support on TRC-20 on March 25. Users had until April 8 to convert, transfer or withdraw their tokens. All these happened whilst their USDC transactions on other chains remained unaffected. It could be said that these incidents have dented investors’ trust in TRON, but it did not prevent TRON from becoming the highest-performing blockchain later in 2024 (even surpassing Ethereum in revenue) and generating approximately $435 million compared to Ethereum's $364 million. And this growth is mainly due to its dominance in the stablecoin market, especially with USDT. But there are also other recent reasons…."
date: 2024-09-03
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/trons-rise-to-dominance-and-the-future
year: 2024
---

# TRON's rise to dominance and the future of its stablecoin 

Currently, [TRC20 (which is USDC on the TRON](https://prestmit.io/blog/trc20-the-most-popular-usdt-network) blockchain), outperforms Circle and its USDC stablecoin in terms of volume of transaction. This further underscores stablecoin payments as a major use case for TRON. And, despite Circle's earlier decision, the adoption trend for TRON remains strong since USDT continues to dominate whilst USDC lags behind. And TRON’s ecosystem has remained resilient, with its blockchain maintaining its position as the primary platform for USDT transactions - Tether’s USDT is accounts for [70% of the stablecoin market](https://coinmarketcap.com/community/articles/66b66ce9e5fa40021f06c26b/) worldwide. Worthy of note, as reported by[ Cointelegraph](https://cointelegraph.com/news/tron-network-exceeds-ethereum-revenue-over-90-days), is that: “ _USDT settlements on the TRON network surged to roughly one-third of payment giant Visa's total settlement volume for the second business quarter of 2024, accounting for a whopping $1.25 trillion in transaction settlements on the TRON network_.” Meanwhile, blockchain tracking firm, Lookonchain, has [reported that Tether minted 33 billion USDT](https://x.com/lookonchain/status/1825779297287803144) in the past year, with 19 billion on the TRON network and 14 billion on Ethereum. Moreover, having a current market cap of over $13 billion, TRON’s TRX has been [shot to the top ten](https://www.cryptotimes.io/2024/08/20/tron-surpasses-cardano-to-enter-the-top-ten-crypto/) largest cryptocurrencies by market cap. However, despite this revenue growth, TRON has also faced challenges such as a decline in its total value locked (TVL) which was [$7.6 billion](https://cointelegraph.com/news/tron-network-deposits-drop-to-6-month-low-as-trx-price-rallies-trouble-in-paradise) in June.

Essentially, TRON is a decentralised blockchain platform launched in 2017 by the TRON Foundation and was originally focused on content sharing and storage via blockchain, evolving into one of the largest global blockchain networks. It is primarily aimed at enabling development of decentralised applications (dApps) and empowering content creators by eliminating intermediaries. It also supports smart contracts and dApps, processing up to 2,000 transactions per second without fees. TRON's native token, TRX, is used for payments, content monetisation and other purposes within its ecosystem, leveraging a delegated proof-of-stake (dPoS) consensus mechanism. Different reasons contribute to its emergence as a top chain in Web3 but, with over [250million](https://bitkan.com/learn/how-many-people-are-using-tron-why-is-its-popularity-rising-34208) users, TRON is on target. According to its CEO, Justin Sun: _“Tron’s protocol revenue could even surpass $2 billion this year, making it the most profitable blockchain on Earth!”_ Its main standout feature is the delegated proof-of-stake (dPoS) system, an alternative to traditional proof-of-stake and proof-of-work algorithms. Delegated proof-of-stake (DPoS) is a consensus mechanism used in blockchain technology and is a variation of proof-of-stake (PoS), but with a democratic twist. Network users, who hold the blockchain's native cryptocurrency, vote for delegates who are community representatives to validate transactions and produce new blocks on the blockchain. This gives TRON a competitive edge by making the network significantly more energy efficient and is how it is able to process thousands of transactions within seconds, and for free.

Another factor contributing to TRON's recent dominance is [Justin Sun's legal victory against the SEC](https://ambcrypto.com/tron-foundation-scores-legal-victory-judge-rejects-secs-request/), which has significantly boosted investor confidence. In 2023, the [SEC accused the TRON Foundatio](https://www.sec.gov/newsroom/press-releases/2023-59)n and Sun of selling unregistered securities, applying the Howey Test to argue that TRX and BTT token sales met the “common enterprise” criteria; TRON’s legal team contested this. Recently, the SEC attempted to force a pre-trial conference to limit TRON’s defence, but the Judge, Edgardo Ramos, denied the request whereby allowing TRON to proceed with its defence strategy. Moreover, this legal success has led to increased accumulation of TRX, further solidifying TRON's position in the market. Memecoins have also contributed to the rise of TRON. Sundog, a new meme coin [launched](https://www.cryptopolitan.com/tron-decouples-from-market-drop-spikes-12/) on the TRON network on August 15th, soared 237% in just 7 days and reached a $200 million market cap. No surprise that this rapid rise reflects increased activity on the TRON network, spurred by the launch of the SunPump meme coin platform - the launch facilitated the creation of [4,844 new meme coins](https://ambcrypto.com/trons-sunpump-effect-4844-new-meme-coins-and-246k-in-revenues/). As a result, TRON’s token (TRX) has surged 19% in the last 30 days, contrasting with Solana's 17% decline over the same period. Furthermore, Sundog's success highlights TRX's growing dominance and challenges Solana's position in the meme coin market. Yet, regardless of this, some are [questioning](https://www.cryptopolitan.com/justin-sun-is-not-behind-the-tron-meme-coin/) if Justin Sun is inflating the price with a market maker to make TRON the go-to blockchain for meme coins, akin to what [Alameda did for Solana](https://cryptorank.io/news/feed/1cc32-solana-ftx-founder-used-alameda-profits-to-buy-sol-for-0-20).

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!exJy!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Feab8bd6d-e63d-4251-80e3-9d0bc84943b4_1074x934.png)

Source: [X](https://x.com/CryptoMutant/status/1826876987169988820)

And whilst mentioning Alameda, it is important to note that, as we learn about TRON, we continue to learn about Justin Sun, since the two entities are indistinguishable. The last time there were those as charismatic as this in Web3 was Sam Bankman Fried at FTX and Changpeng Zhao from Binance, both who have ended up behind bars…... But, Justin Sun's influence on the TRON ecosystem is undeniable. As the CEO of TRON, Sun has played a pivotal role in shaping the platform's direction and development. However, this close association has also raised concerns about potential conflicts of interest and the concentration of power within a single entity. Sun's recent actions surrounding [USDD (TRON's algorithmic stablecoin)](https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20220420005462/en/TRON-Founder-H.E.-Justin-Sun-Announces-the-Launch-of-USDD-%E2%80%94-A-Decentralized-Stablecoin) have further intensified scrutiny. Whilst USDD was initially designed to be more stable than Terra's UST - due to its over-collateralised model - several issues have surfaced: unsurprisingly, Sun's decision to [remove 12,000 BTC](https://protos.com/justin-suns-usdd-removes-12000-btc-without-dao-approval/) from USDD's collateral without approval from the TRON DAO reserve does raise questions about transparency and governance; this renders USDD void of any BTC backing. [Storing a significant portion](https://protos.com/justin-sun-stored-usdd-reserves-at-htx-for-proof-of-reserves/) of USDD's collateral on HTX, a centralised exchange, introduces additional risks and potential vulnerabilities although, as the above confirms, Sun claims: “ _Removing 12,000 BTC from USSD is just Defi 101.”_ And the dwindling supply of USDT in USDD's stability mechanism suggests that the coin's peg may be at risk, especially during periods of market volatility; it is currently on backed by TRON and USDT. But, although Sun's actions may raise parallels with Sam Bankman Fried's role in the FTX collapse, it is important to note that the circumstances and specific allegations differ. However, both cases highlight the potential risks associated with centralised control within decentralised ecosystems.

In essence, the relationship between Justin Sun and the TRON ecosystem is complex and multifaceted. Whilst Sun has undoubtedly contributed to TRON's growth and development, his recent actions regarding decisions such as altering the collateral backing TRON's algorithmic stablecoin (USDD) raise concerns about transparency, governance and the potential for conflicts of interest. His recent legal victory against the SEC has bolstered confidence but, as TRON continues to rise, questions exist as to whether its growth is sustainable or a precursor to deeper issues within the decentralised finance landscape.
