---
title: "Blockchain goes to the Olympics"
description: "Blockchain technology is making waves at the Olympics, joining the ranks of the many flags representing nations worldwide. The IOC has embraced blockchain by launching games and digital collectibles such as NFTs that engage fans and create new revenue streams. Notably, “Olympics Go! Paris 2024”, will feature mini-games and a city-building simulator, offering exclusive digital items. Additionally, Olympics-themed meme coins have emerged, further merging sports and blockchain. Will blockchain be the gold standard, then, for future Games?"
date: 2024-08-13
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/blockchain-goes-to-the-olympics
year: 2024
---

# Blockchain goes to the Olympics

Blockchain is emerging as a powerful tool in the Olympic arena, challenging traditional methods. Once dominated by the flags of competing nations, the Games are now witnessing the rise of a digital flagbearer: blockchain technology. So, can this decentralised system be used to revolutionise ticketing, enhance athlete performance tracking and ensure the integrity of results? Well, the Olympic Games, a global spectacle uniting nations in athletic competition, has evolved into a platform profoundly influenced by technological advancements. From performance-enhancing equipment to real-time analytics, innovation has reshaped the sporting landscape. [Animoca Brands](https://www.proactiveinvestors.co.uk/companies/news/1051661/animoca-brands-subsidiary-to-launch-olympic-games-paris-2024-mascot-nft-pins-1051661.html) has created a series of Olympic NFTs for the Paris 2024 mascot, a ‘phyrge’. As reported by the [Washington Post:](https://www.washingtonpost.com/style/of-interest/2024/07/30/phryges-paris-olympics-mascot-2024/) “ _The Phryges are meant to be “two little Phrygian caps” that symbolize the French Republic and freedom._ ” Furthermore, Animoca has teamed up with Coinbase to make these NFTs available as part of Coinbase’s Onchain summer event. And, if you wondered what the Olympians received in those boxes alongside their medals - well, it is a poster of famous Parisian sites.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!gb2S!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F3f73dce6-0347-4dc4-be2c-120ab4ba02cd_1088x616.png)

Source: [X](https://x.com/F3Lollipops/status/1817268739525538201)

So, as mentioned before, whilst nations compete for gold medals and global recognition, a silent yet powerful contender is making its mark: blockchain technology. This decentralised system, renowned for its security and transparency, is reshaping and revolutionising the Olympics. From ensuring the integrity of competitions through anti-doping measures and equipment verification, to enhancing fan experiences with secure ticketing, exclusive digital collectables and transparent merchandise supply chains, blockchain is reshaping the future of the Games. As the world watches athletes push the boundaries of human performance, blockchain is quietly breaking new ground in sports technology, promising an exciting future for sports enthusiasts.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!XX9M!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fee449c83-2f71-4f7c-acd1-9e499b909f6d_1100x616.png)

Source:[ X](https://x.com/IcemanAssets/status/1489941650239541250)

In essence, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) has strategically moved into the blockchain world by [launching a mobile game](https://www.cnbc.com/2022/02/03/ioc-launches-beijing-olympics-themed-mobile-game-with-nfts.html) tied to the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics, and this forward-thinking step has positioned the IOC at the forefront of digital innovation within the sports industry. Developed by Animoca in partnership with nWay, a blockchain gaming studio, '[Olympic Games Jam: Beijing 2022](https://olympicgamesjam.nwayplay.com/?utm_source=Flowverse&utm_medium=Website&utm_campaign=Dapp) ' has offered players the opportunity to compete in sports events whilst collecting digital collectibles. These NFTs, representing virtual ownership of unique digital items, can be traded on nWay's marketplace. Furthermore, the IOC has tapped into the growing collectible market by introducing digital Olympic pins as NFTs. These virtual pins, licensed through the IOC's official program, generate revenue through royalties on each sale and this venture signifies a broader trend of major institutions adopting blockchain technology. Certainly, as NFTs continue to gain popularity, the IOC's foray into this space could set a precedent for other sports organisations seeking to leverage digital assets for fan engagement and revenue generation. The potential for increased fan interaction through digital collectibles and NFTs is not just an exciting prospect, but a promising reality for the future of the Olympics. As nWay CEO, Taehoon Kim, [declared in 2022,](https://www.cnbc.com/2022/02/03/ioc-launches-beijing-olympics-themed-mobile-game-with-nfts.html) its new game allows players to “ _own a piece of Olympic history_ ” and promises continuous updates to maintain player engagement. This innovative approach engages fans and creates a new revenue stream for the organisation, but also sustains the Olympic spirit in new and meaningful ways through blockchain technology, making fans feel more engaged and part of the Olympic experience.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!ee-n!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F35213331-98a5-492b-abec-906a51c09673_1012x1014.png)

Source: [X](https://x.com/lycos_co_kr/status/1818557431515115786)

In addition, nWay has announced, “Olympics Go! Paris 2024”, a cross-platform game for both mobile and PC. Developed by Nvizzio Creations and GlobalStep, the game features mini-games based on 12 Olympic sports and includes a city-building simulator. Players can customise their Olympic host city and level up athletes by earning in-game points. _“Olympics Go! Paris 2024” encapsulates the Olympic spirit and global appeal of the Olympic Games Paris 2024. By integrating iconic Olympic sports and introducing innovative elements like breaking, the game reflects the Olympics’ commitment to promoting diversity and modernity while inspiring excellence and camaraderie among participants_ ”, IOC Deputy Managing Director, Elisabeth Allaman, has pointed out. Meanwhile, another Olympics 2024 game, [Athletics Rush](https://cryptonews.net/news/blockchain/29476433/), by TapNation, is currently hosted on the Tezos blockchain. Different Olympics-themed meme coins have been [created](https://www.kucoin.com/news/articles/top-olympics-themed-memecoins-to-watch-fueling-the-crypto-surge-ahead-of-paris-2024) pre-2024 Olympics, which has been a strong point for rallying different fans. Key tokens include: the Meme Games ($MGMES), PlayDoge ($PLAY), Mega Dice Token ($DICE), Solympics (SOLYMPICS), Gold Medal Token (OlympicGM), Olympic Games Token (OGT) and Olympic Game Doge (OGD). Each token offers unique features such as high APY staking, gaming experiences, profit-sharing, rapid price surges and community engagement. Undoubtedly, the emergence of these Olympics-themed meme coins has reflected the growing intersection between sports and blockchain. These tokens capitalise on the excitement surrounding the Olympics and offer unique features, potentially boosting interest and investment in the sports and crypto markets, so providing a unique way to celebrate and financially engage with the Olympic spirit.

In the interim, [Paris 2024 organisers](https://www.seatlabnft.com/blog/blockchain-ticketing-for-the-2024-paris-olympics) considered blockchain ticketing after chaos ensued at the Champions League final where fake tickets and logistical issues caused widespread disturbances and which eventually involved the police shooting teargas at football fans. For Paris’s Olympics, the Stade de France (with a seating capacity of over 80,000) has been the main host, prompting security and ticket fraud concerns. UEFA previously [distributed](https://www.secutix.com/articles/uefa-euro-2020-role-mobile-blockchain-ticketing) nearly 1 million mobile tickets for UEFA EURO 2020 using blockchain technology through its partnership with SECUTIX Solution. However, the initial plan to transition the Olympics to blockchain was ultimately abandoned due to a decision to [maintain a conventional ticketing system](https://coindoo.com/paris-2024-employs-conventional-ticketing-despite-initial-crypto-discussions/) \- interestingly, no reason was given for the abandonment. In the same vein, the Nway Beijing Olympic NFT games were released in various countries apart from China, due to the Chinese anti-blockchain stance.

Blockchain-powered platforms could still be used at future Olympics so as to secure athlete medical records, use digital money for purchasing ticket sales, merchandise purchases or sponsorship deals, and create digital tickets to help meet the challenges of counterfeiting. In addition, blockchain technology could be used to support anti-doping measures, with drug tests results stored on an immutable blockchain so making them tamper-proof and accessible only to authorised personnel. And, during the Games themselves, where judging can be subjective (such as gymnastics or diving), could blockchain be used to enhance transparency? For example, by recording judges’ scores on a blockchain, every decision becomes auditable and reviewable so paving the way for fairer and more consistent outcomes. Ultimately, as sports continue to evolve, could blockchain technology therefore be the key to ensuring ultimate integrity and trust in the process?

Whilst the spotlight often shines on immediate victories, it remains crucial to remember that many of this year’s champions have endured previous failures. Their ultimate triumph is a testament to perseverance - without doubt, a quality equally essential for the blockchain industry. Just as athletes train relentlessly for their moment in the spotlight, then blockchain technology requires sustained development and adaptation. The Olympic spirit teaches us that setbacks are inevitable but should not deter us from our goals. So, whilst the blockchain industry may face challenges, it is vital to acknowledge its progress and build upon those successes. Ultimately, the courage and resilience displayed by Olympic athletes mirror the qualities needed to drive blockchain innovation forward.
