---
title: "The future of edge computing in Web3"
description: "Edge computing is emerging as a critical enabler for Web3, addressing performance, scalability and latency issues in decentralised systems. By processing data closer to users, edge computing enhances applications such as decentralised finance (DeFi), gaming (e.g., Decentraland and Axie Infinity), IoT networks (e.g., Tesla's Powerwall) and decentralised content delivery (e.g., IPFS and Filecoin). Furthermore, it supports real-time interactions, secure data sharing and faster transaction speeds, whereby making it a cornerstone for decentralising the internet. Together, edge computing and Web3 promise a faster, more reliable and user-controlled digital future, although challenges such as standardisation and security remain."
date: 2024-11-26
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/the-future-of-edge-computing-in-web3
year: 2024
---

# The future of edge computing in Web3

[EVMs are the engines behind the execution of smart contracts](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/evm/), allowing them to operate autonomously and securely on the Ethereum blockchain. They serve as the runtime environment for code written in languages, such as Solidity. EVMs are instrumental in ensuring consistency across all network nodes and facilitating consensus among participants, making them a critical component of the Ethereum ecosystem. However, EVM computations encounter challenges with cloud computing due to latency and their centralised nature. The infrastructure around the way cloud providers are setup often causes delays, impacting the real-time responsiveness required by decentralised applications. Additionally, centralised clouds may not align with the distributed and trust less nature of blockchain, raising concerns about security and reliability. Therefore, EVMs are also one of the many ways in which Web3 is not living up to its potential due to limitations in the current internet infrastructure. Nonetheless, just as there are problems, there are solutions, but what are the solutions to such challenges? Moreover, what does it say about the current state of the internet and Web3? Certainly, the internet has seen radical changes in recent decades, evolving from [Web1 in 1989 to the concurrent existence of Web2 and Web3 in 2023](https://www.investopedia.com/web-20-web-30-5208698). In 2023, it has transformed from a fundamental part of life to a significant disruptor of civilisation. Currently, the internet is shifting from the “cloud” to the “edge” for improved performance and speed and, so, could such a shift in time present a challenge to the main cloud providers on Amazon, Google, Microsoft, IBM, Oracle and Tencent?

Meanwhile, [Edge network servers](https://www.onlogic.com/company/io-hub/what-are-edge-servers/) replace traditional central servers, reducing latency by bringing computation and data storage closer to the location where it is needed and enhancing real-time processing capabilities. They combine content delivery network (CDN) advantages such as regional content delivery with serverless benefits and optimisation of network resources. Modern frameworks such as [React,](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/blog/react-a-synergistic-cloud-edge-fusion-architecture/) [Next.JS](https://witarist.com/blogs/the-current-status-and-the-future-of-next-js/) and [Jamstack](https://foreignerds.com/jamstack-edge-computing/) (similar to Web3's evolution) accelerate this shift by separating web layers and fostering monetisation. In its modularisation, Web3 does lack an edge/performance layer whereby leading to reliance on centralised providers such as Cloudflare or Amazon’s AWS whereby causing inefficiencies. Edge network servers, on the other hand, act as a shared performance layer for Web3, aligning with how the modern web will operate - now and in the future. This shared layer can solve EVM’s current cloud limitations and offer the potential to enhance Web3 comprehensively, ultimately boosting adoption.

**Examples of companies using edge computing**

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!mDsk!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fe4037e35-612b-4d57-a304-49b80b8bb1e6_1920x1080.png)

Source: TeamBlockchain

Decentralised IoT networks, such as [Tesla’s Powerwall, use edge computing](https://www.infoq.com/news/2020/03/tesla-vpp/) to process energy data locally, optimising consumption and enabling secure, blockchain-backed data sharing. Gaming platforms such as [Decentraland and Axie Infinity rely on edge computing](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=10697124) to reduce latency for real-time gameplay, with NFTs representing in-game assets stored on blockchains. DeFi protocols such as Uniswap and Aave benefit from edge computing to enhance transaction speed and reliability, connecting efficiently with blockchain systems. Content delivery platforms such as [IPFS](https://fleek.xyz/blog/announcements/fleek-decentralized-ipfs-gateway/) and [Filecoin](https://filecoin.io/blog/posts/introducing-filecoin-data-tools-fdt/) leverage edge nodes for faster data access, whilst blockchain ensures data integrity in decentralised storage solutions. Therefore, solving EVM's cloud limitation is merely one use case. Others include and are not limited to:

> · **DeFi** \- decentralised finance applications require high-speed transaction processing and data access. Edge computing can provide the necessary performance boost, ensuring seamless user experiences and liquidity in DeFi platforms.
> 
> · **gaming:** In Web3 gaming, players demand real-time interactions, low-latency gameplay and decentralised assets. Edge computing can deliver on these requirements by hosting game servers and handling in-game transactions.
> 
> · **content delivery** \- content creators in the Web3 ecosystem can utilise edge computing to distribute digital content, ensuring users can access decentralised media and services quickly and reliably.
> 
> · **IoT and Web3** \- the internet of things (IoT) plays a vital role in Web3 by enabling the connection of physical devices to decentralised networks. Edge computing is essential for processing and analysing data from these devices efficiently and securely.
> 
> · **decentralised site/app hosting** \- edge computing reduces latency, ensuring rapid access. It scales dynamically, overcoming bottlenecks and guarantees resilience, even during server or network issues.
> 
> · **decentralised IPFS pinning** \- IPFS pinning refers to the process of specifying data to be retained and persisted on one or more IPFS nodes. Edge nodes minimise data retrieval latency, boost data availability through redundancy and ensure robust data security. [Sia, Filecoin and Storj](https://discuss.ipfs.tech/t/pinning-a-file-without-keeping-it-in-local-storage/11156) are examples that store data in a decentralised cloud environment.
> 
> · **Web 3 queries/events** \- edge computing accelerates Web3 with real-time processing, efficient load balancing and uniform query/event handling.
> 
> · **verified randomness** \- edge-based random number generation delivers trust less randomness, transparent processes and enhanced security for applications dependent on random data.

Edge computing is thought by some to be the linchpin of a new era in decentralised web services with its ability to reduce latency, enhance scalability, bolster availability and fortify security. Edge computing paves the way for a more efficient and secure decentralised internet, offering nothing short of being transformative. However, as the decentralised web is evolving, edge computing must also be prepared to handle challenges that come with new web structures such as standardisation, security and network connectivity. Together, the two have the potential to create a truly decentralised internet where users have control over their data, transactions are trust less and the online experience is faster and more reliable. But, irrespective of this, can edge computing truly decentralise the internet or will reliance on central providers such as AWS persist? How will it balance trust less interactions with the need for standardisation and security in a fragmented digital landscape? And as it drives interoperability and performance, could it inadvertently create new gatekeepers, so reshaping the very ideals of decentralisation? This technological evolution is not simply about faster transactions or smoother gameplay - it challenges the core principles of data ownership, control and freedom in the digital age. Therefore, will edge computing and Web3 deliver on the promise of a user-controlled internet, or will it expose new vulnerabilities in the rush to decentralise? The answers may define the next era of the web….
