---
title: "Inheritance: managing digital assets in the digital afterlife"
description: "In the digital age, personal identities are increasingly tied to digital assets such as cryptocurrencies, social media accounts and NFTs, whereby necessitating effective management strategies. The digital asset management market, valued at USD4.22 billion in 2023, is projected to grow at 16.2% annually until 2030. However, traditional inheritance frameworks are struggling to adapt, raising vital questions about securing digital legacies. Establishing digital wills and employing blockchain technology, including smart contracts, can facilitate seamless asset transfer and ensure that individuals' wishes are honoured. Addressing the challenges of privacy, legal complexities and emotional factors is crucial for protecting one’s digital legacy."
date: 2024-10-22
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/inheritance-managing-digital-assets
year: 2024
---

# Inheritance: managing digital assets in the digital afterlife

In the digital age, our personal identities are intricately linked to a growing array of digital assets and social media accounts to online intellectual property. In 2023, the global digital asset management market was valued at [USD 4.22 billion with a projected growth rate of 16.2% from 2024 to 2030](https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/digital-asset-management-market#:~:text=The%20global%20digital%20asset%20management,asset%20management%20\(DAM\)%20systems). This surge reflects the impact of remote work and distributed teams, which have accelerated the need for digital asset management systems. However, traditional inheritance frameworks struggle to keep pace with this rapid evolution and, as individuals accumulate valuable digital assets, questions arise about how to secure their legacies effectively. What happens to these assets when we are gone? How can we establish digital wills that ensure our wishes are honoured? And, who will manage our blockchain inheritance? Therefore, addressing these challenges is crucial for navigating the emerging field of digital inheritance law and ensuring our digital legacies are protected.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!yJya!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F0fce8103-6831-408a-8b81-29e5c91cb61e_836x830.png)

Source: TeamBlockchain

In our increasingly digital world, [digital assets](https://www.rochelegal.co.uk/resources/help-guides/digital-assets-what-are-they-and-what-happens-to-them-on-death/) have emerged as a vital concept. This term encompasses a variety of items, including cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin, tokenised real-world assets, social media profiles, domain names, NFTs and digital documents. As individuals build their collections of these assets, understanding their importance in both personal and financial contexts is crucial. Digital assets can represent considerable monetary worth, exemplified by cryptocurrencies and profitable social media accounts, as well as sentimental value associated with family photos and videos. Although digital assets are becoming more common, they are often overlooked in conventional [estate planning](https://trustandwill.com/learn/digital-inheritance). This type of planning involves preparing for the transfer of individuals’ assets after their passing away, and it now includes digital assets; neglecting these assets can lead to considerable losses for heirs who might not be aware of their existence. This also highlights the increasing importance of planning for a digital inheritance so by setting forth clear instructions regarding the future of digital assets, individuals can ensure their legacies are protected. For instance, indicating how social media accounts should be treated or appointing beneficiaries for digital assets can bring peace of mind and prevent valuable digital legacies from being lost online. Thoughtful estate planning can help guarantee that all assets, tangible and digital, are managed according to your desires, allowing your family members to handle the intricacies of digital asset inheritance more smoothly.

Essentially, a [digital will](https://www.findlaw.com/forms/resources/estate-planning/last-will-and-testament/what-is-a-digital-will.html) is a document that outlines how to manage your digital assets after your death, including electronic records, online accounts and digital assets. Unlike a traditional will, which is a legally binding document detailing the distribution of physical property, a digital will focuses specifically on your digital footprint. It can be included as part of a traditional will or exist as a separate entity, although the latter does not carry the same legal weight. However, digital wills are not universally recognised and legal acceptance varies across jurisdictions, making it essential to understand local laws when creating one.

[In the US, the Uniform Electronic Wills Act (E-Wills Act)](https://www.thegazette.co.uk/wills-and-probate/content/103428) allows individuals to create, sign and execute valid wills online, thus providing legal acknowledgment for electronic wills. This change has modernised estate planning, making it more accessible in the digital era. Interestingly though, [the UK has not adopted comparable legislation](https://www.docusign.com/products/electronic-signature/legality/the-united-kingdom) \- traditional laws still require physical signatures in the presence of witnesses, so posing challenges for the implementation of electronic wills.

Essentially, [creating a digital will](https://bluenotary.us/digital-estate-planning/) requires identifying your various digital assets - this includes email accounts, social media profiles, cloud storage and any online accounts holding value. Next, a trusted digital executor needs to be selected - this could be a corporate entity or an individual who can manage your digital legacy according to your wishes. Providing clear instructions for accessing and managing these assets is crucial as many online accounts are governed by user licenses rather than ownership, limiting how they can be transferred. Many resources and services, such as [Everplans](https://www.everplans.com/) and [Final Security](https://finalsecurity.co/), facilitate the creation of digital wills whereby providing features such as inventory management and secure storage for login credentials. By employing these tools, you can effectively organise your digital estate and ensure that your wishes are honoured, safeguarding your digital legacy (which involves navigating challenges that blend privacy, legal issues and emotional considerations) for future generations. Furthermore, privacy and security are critical concerns particularly in an age where hacking and identity theft remain serious threats, even after death. Unauthorised access to your accounts could result in the misuse of personal data or financial resources and, additionally, managing numerous passwords and access to various online services can be daunting. After all, with many accounts secured by different credentials, having a comprehensive plan is essential to enable your digital executor to traverse this intricate landscape smoothly. Meanwhile, the legal intricacies surrounding digital assets introduce another layer of challenge with various countries enforcing different laws regarding digital assets so resulting in a complex tapestry of regulations that can complicate the situation for your heirs. Also, the clash between traditional estate laws and the management of digital assets often leads to confusion. For example, how does one align the ownership of a digital account with the legal structures that govern physical assets? This ambiguity can obstruct the seamless transfer of your digital legacy.

Emotional considerations are equally important. Choosing someone to handle your digital legacy requires a deep level of trust because this will involve access to your most intimate online life; it is a profound responsibility that can weigh heavily on both you and your loved ones. Additionally, the impact of your digital legacy on your family’s grieving process should not be overlooked. The emotional burden of managing your online presence (particularly if it contains sensitive or unresolved matters) can complicate their healing journey. By acknowledging these challenges, you can take proactive steps to secure your digital legacy whilst considering the well-being of those you leave behind. The advent of blockchain technology presents [innovative methods for transferring rights to digital assets](https://www.trakti.com/digital-inheritance-blockchain-smart-contracts/) enabling a secure and automated process for inheritance. Digital assets encompass a wide range of online items and we continue see more different types of assets being digitised including personal health data and loyalty programs, so it becomes crucial to develop new frameworks that ensure these assets are passed on according to one’s wishes and desires. Central to this evolution are [smart contracts](https://www.britannica.com/money/how-smart-contracts-work) \- self-executing agreements encoded on a blockchain that automatically facilitate the transfer of digital assets upon a specified event, such as the death of the asset owner. For instance, a smart contract can stipulate that, upon the presentation of a death certificate, specific digital assets are transferred directly to designated heirs. This technology not only enhances security but also simplifies the inheritance process, potentially bypassing lengthy probate proceedings. Education is crucial for heirs managing these digital assets as many individuals may lack the technical knowledge to navigate blockchain platforms or understand the implications of their digital inheritances. Therefore, preparing heirs with the necessary information about how to access and manage these assets is essential. By embracing blockchain technology and smart contracts, individuals can ensure that their digital legacies are preserved and transferred seamlessly, providing peace of mind for both them and their loved ones.

In essence, blockchain technology (particularly smart contracts) offers potential solutions by enabling the automatic transfer of digital assets upon death, so bypassing traditional probate procedures and enhancing security. However, critical challenges remain - how can legal systems adapt to the complexities of digital ownership and will heirs be equipped with the necessary knowledge to manage blockchain-based inheritances? As we consider the future of digital legacies, these questions prompt reflection on the evolving relationship between technology, law and personal legacy as well as how we can ensure that our digital lives are secured for the next generation. So, as our lives intertwine with technology, it is essential to take proactive steps to secure your digital inheritance, whether through digital wills or blockchain solutions. It is certainly worth considering what digital legacies you hold and how they might impact your loved ones. Are you prepared to manage and transfer these assets effectively? If not, however, then there might be merit in reflecting on your digital footprint and taking action now to safeguard your online legacy for future generations.
