---
title: "Web3: the foundation of the metaverse's future "
description: "Written by Dr Jane Thomason. Web3 and the metaverse are transforming key sectors, with eSports expected to hit $10 billion by 2023. Healthcare is benefiting from immersive experiences and real-time surgical guidance, whilst education (projected to grow to $763.70 million by 2030) is utilising VR and AR for interactive learning. Meanwhile, tourism is revolutionised through virtual exploration via AR/VR, with secure transactions enabled by digital money. Industries are optimising operations with digital twins and VR/AR, supported by blockchain for efficiency. Web3 and the metaverse are redefining how we play, work, learn and engage - so are you ready for this new digital era?"
date: 2024-06-10
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/web3-technology-has-ushered-in-a
year: 2024
---

# Web3: the foundation of the metaverse's future 

Imagine a world where decentralised technologies are powered by virtual experiences, creating a new economy driven by blockchain technology. This is the promise of the open Web3 metaverse, a transformative force set to impact multiple sectors, from gaming to healthcare to tourism and many more business sectors.

**Gaming: beyond play**

Web3 gaming isn't just about entertainment, building communities and fostering social integration. With the market projected to reach [$200 billion](https://www.lomitpatel.com/articles/web3-gaming-revolution/#:~:text=Gaming%20NFTs%20are%20on%20the,with%20the%20new%20economic%20model.), Web3 gaming is booming, as seen in the [2,000% increase](https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbesbusinesscouncil/2024/01/09/gaming-is-growing-and-web3-is-coming-with-it/?sh=2929b89c42e3) in activity from 2021 to 2022. Blockchain game transactions hit $5.41 billion in 2022, with a projected CAGR of 68.9%​, and are expected to be worth more than [$1 billion by 2032](https://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2023/03/09/2624004/0/en/Worldwide-Blockchain-Gaming-Market-Size-Share-Cap-Predicted-to-Reach-USD-1-020-02-Billion-By-2032-at-68-9-CAGR-Growth-Polaris-Market-Research.html#:~:text=%5B115%2B%20Pages%20Research%20Study%5D,anticipated%20to%20accelerate%20market%20expansion.)​. This month, [Sandbox](https://venturebeat.com/games/the-sandbox-raises-20m-in-convertible-debt-at-1b-valuation-for-sandbox-metaverse/) raised $20M in convertible debt at a $1B valuation for Sandbox Metaverse. Play to Earn (P2E) games gained traction during the pandemic but often fell short due to unsustainable models. In contrast, Play and Earn (PAE) games, such as Illuvium and Guild of Guardians, balance financial rewards and enjoyable gameplay, ensuring sustainability and inclusivity. As defined [by LCX.com](https://www.lcx.com/difference-between-play-to-earn-and-play-and-earn-games/#:~:text=P2E%20games%20are%20primarily%20focused,experiences%20that%20can%20engage%20players.): “ _P2E games are primarily focused on earning mechanisms. Due to the inability of the gameplay experience in P2E games to attract enthusiasts, developers rely on the economic structure as a value proposition. Play-and-earn games, on the other hand, focus on providing superior gameplay experiences that can engage players.”_ Web3 technologies are reconstructing electronic sports (Esports), a market that is estimated to be growing at over 20% p.a. and will be worth a staggering $10 billion[ by 2023](https://finance.yahoo.com/news/esports-market-rising-20-9-101600560.html?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAAKiwSUrS40ebp2U0lxpCtl1qmcOdXqbqcXkT-2i8vTaf9iurSuR9SgDBsMjfYPEWgA-TjShodnuzQSMUZu4l-4Hyw8osyG-QOTNibsGAf1vW89XspY5daKZBtB2DVBjcNB0acVCTU8vknifPh4xJR7PwWMZ-XnUXzBauwrqH7az-). They are integrating NFTs for cross-platform assets, tokenized rewards and DAOs for governance. These innovations empower fans and teams, driving engagement and capital raising through fan tokens and crowdfunding. However, Web3 gaming faces challenges such as tokenomics sustainability and regulatory compliance. Addressing these barriers is crucial to empowering players, facilitating tokenised economies and redefining traditional gaming experiences. The metaverse is impacting other business sectors, including:

> ● **Healthcare** \- the metaverse is providing the healthcare sector with immersive experiences, real-time surgical guidance and interconnected data. Avatars facilitate realistic consultations and personalised care, whilst gamification connects providers and patients, especially in wellness, fitness and mental health.
> 
> ● **Collaborative work and education** \- the metaverse enables health professionals to collaborate seamlessly using 3D avatars and digital tools. VR and AR transform medical education with immersive learning experiences and procedural simulations, facilitating collaborative engagement.
> 
> ● **Clinical care and gamification** \- avatars in clinical consultations introduce personalised care, whilst real-time surgical guidance and enhanced assessments are possible in the metaverse. Gamification promotes physical activity through "move-to-earn" models, and Blockchain and GameFi create economic opportunities by monetising health data.
> 
> ● **Education** \- the metaverse is set to redefine education, with the market expected to grow to $763.70 million by 2030. Its potential as an accessible, cost-effective platform promotes global collaboration and knowledge exchange. Web3 "Learn to Earn" games incentivise student engagement with token rewards. VR and AR offer immersive tools that overcome traditional barriers and provide realistic educational experiences. The metaverse shifts virtual learning from passive consumption to interactive experiences. Initiatives like the [VoluProf project](https://www.hhi.fraunhofer.de/en/departments/vca/projects/voluprof.html) in Germany and virtual classrooms offer immersive interactions and collaborative learning opportunities. The open metaverse will democratise education, ensuring inclusivity for individuals facing geographical, physical, or socioeconomic barriers. This creates a globally accessible, gamified educational landscape.
> 
> ● **Tourism** \- the metaverse transforms tourism by enabling virtual exploration, enhancing customer engagement and streamlining operations. AR and VR provide virtual tours and experiential simulations, redefining spatial exploration.Web3 integrates decentralised finance, NFTs and self-sovereign identity, revolutionising metaverse tourism. Blockchain ensures secure transactions, whilst NFTs provide ownership and value to virtual experiences. Digital twins enhance authenticity. Shanghai's integration of Web3 in tourism showcases innovation. Airlines and hotels use the metaverse for pre-travel experiences and virtual tours, enhancing engagement and efficiency. Case studies like KLM's virtual fleet tours exemplify these advancements.

The industrial metaverse is changing sectors like aviation and electric vehicle manufacturing through digital twins and VR/AR technologies. These advancements optimise operations, enhance training and streamline manufacturing. Blockchain underpins the industrial metaverse by ensuring transactional integrity, automating processes with smart contracts and facilitating asset management. Web3 and blockchain enhance efficiency and transparency. The one common element impacting all of the above and every business globally is payments. In a decentralised metaverse, programmable money powered by blockchain technology is creating digital payment solutions. Cryptocurrencies and stablecoins facilitate seamless, secure transactions. NFTs provide proof of ownership for virtual assets. [A PayPal survey](https://newsroom.paypal-corp.com/2023-06-Metaverse-and-Money) highlights the importance of being able to use cryptocurrencies (89%) and stablecoins (84%) for purchases, promoting interoperability and driving a vibrant virtual economy.

The Web3 metaverse is on the brink of transforming various sectors with decentralised, immersive experiences. Challenges like tokenomics sustainability and regulatory compliance remain to unlock the full potential. However, it’s here to stay and growing. Embrace the Web3 metaverse and be part of the future of gaming, healthcare, education, tourism, industry and payments. Are you prepared for the transformative journey ahead? Web3 and the metaverse are set to redefine how we play, work, learn, travel and engage with the world. What unprecedented opportunities and challenges will you face in this decentralised, interconnected future? The fusion of Web3 and the metaverse is more than technological advancement - a shift towards a new digital era. Are you ready to embrace this future?
