---
title: "Part 1: Trade wars to tax breaks - how Trump’s economic policies shaped the cryptocurrency landscape"
description: "The US-China trade war, tax cuts and deregulation under Trump’s administration had a profound influence on the cryptocurrency landscape with tariffs sparking an interest in Bitcoin as a “borderless” asset protecting against geopolitical risks. Tax cuts have provided consumers with more disposable income which has boosted crypto investments, whilst deregulation has encouraged institutional involvement particularly with crypto custodial services. Stimulus payments have also added fuel to the fire, leading to increased retail interest in Bitcoin and decentralised finance (DeFi). In essence, these policies have helped shape an environment ripe for cryptocurrency growth and development."
date: 2024-11-26
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/part-1-trade-wars-to-tax-breaks-how
year: 2024
---

# Part 1: Trade wars to tax breaks - how Trump’s economic policies shaped the cryptocurrency landscape

With Donald Trump taking office again, the financial world is carefully watching the potential effects of his economic policies on traditional markets and the cryptocurrency sphere. During his first presidency, his approach - encompassing trade conflicts, tax reforms and deregulation - transformed financial landscapes so fostering the emergence of digital currencies. And, as the cryptocurrency market has developed since then, it faces a defining moment because Trump’s policies are likely to play an even bigger role in shaping the future of crypto, making the intersection of economic challenges and digital currencies more crucial than ever.

**The US-China trade war: fuelling interest in Bitcoin**

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!J9UT!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F0e975dca-8606-477b-aa82-8bccbb10680d_968x548.png)

Source: TeamBlockchain

One of the defining elements of Trump’s economic agenda, the [US-China trade war](https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/mi/solutions/us-china-trade-war-impacts.html), had extensive economic consequences thus driving many investors to turn to alternative assets. Beginning in 2018, Trump’s tariffs on imports from China provoked retaliatory actions, leading to escalating costs and growing economic uncertainty on both sides of the Pacific. And since the US and China hold significant global economic power, the drawn-out trade dispute caused global market disruptions, amplifying investor anxiety and sparking stock market instability. During this time, Bitcoin gained appeal as a “borderless” asset, not tied to any government or economy and standing apart from traditional assets such as stocks or bonds. But, unlike the Chinese yuan (which faced devaluation during the trade war), Bitcoin maintained relative independence from direct currency manipulation, [positioning it as an appealing alternative for those wary of fluctuations in traditional fiat currencies](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/21582440211040411?download=true). This comparison between Bitcoin and the yuan highlights Bitcoin’s appeal as a hedge for international investors looking to mitigate risks associated with both US and Chinese economic instability. When analysing Bitcoin’s price trends during trade war intensifications, a noticeable pattern emerges: Bitcoin’s price has tended to rise as tensions escalated, reinforcing its role as a [“digital safe haven”.](https://www.econjournals.com/index.php/ijefi/article/download/6446/pdf/16316) Investors saw Bitcoin as a decentralised asset that was resistant to geopolitical conflicts and currency instability, making it an appealing choice for those looking to diversify their portfolios amidst economic uncertainty. The US-China trade war highlighted Bitcoin’s unique function as a hedge against global risks and an alternative to state-backed financial assets.

**Crypto as a hedge against political risk**

Bitcoin’s reputation as “digital gold” has further been solidified during times of political and economic uncertainty, particularly during events such the US-China trade war. As traditional assets (e.g. US Treasury bonds and gold) fluctuated in response to rising political risks, Bitcoin’s behaviour has also stood out. And, unlike traditional “safe haven” assets, which often take time to react, Bitcoin showed a more immediate correlation with market volatility. For example, during the summer of 2019, escalating [trade tensions between the US and China caused sharp swings in the S&P 500 index](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/02/business/global-markets.html). Yet, whilst traditional markets struggled, Bitcoin saw a noticeable uptick in both price and trading volume. This moment marked a significant shift for many institutional investors, including hedge funds and asset managers, who began viewing Bitcoin not just as a speculative investment but as a valuable diversification tool. Consequently, Bitcoin gained popularity as a means of protecting against potential currency devaluations, geopolitical risks and wider economic turmoil. And, with its liquidity and decentralised structure, Bitcoin became an attractive alternative for those seeking assets that were less correlated with traditional safe havens. Today, Bitcoin’s role in diversified portfolios as a hedge against political risks is clearer than ever.

**The role of tax reform in boosting crypto investment**

The [Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA)](https://www.cbpp.org/research/federal-tax/lessons-from-the-2017-tax-law-for-the-future-of-us-corporate-taxation#:~:text=Evidence%20indicates%20that%20the%20TCJA's,around%201%20percent%20after%20TCJA.) was signed into law by President Trump in December 2017, representing the most significant overhaul of the US tax code since the 1980s. The primary goal was to spur economic growth by reducing corporate tax rates and lowering individual tax burdens, which would increase disposable income for US consumers. Though focused on the traditional economy, the TCJA had a significant (and sometimes overlooked) influence on the cryptocurrency market. As corporate taxes were reduced, businesses experienced a boost in profits, much of which was directed into speculative investments including cryptocurrency. With more capital at their disposal and lower tax obligations, companies were more willing to take risks, making crypto assets an appealing choice for high returns. This increase in disposable income for both businesses and consumers fostered an environment conducive to the expansion of the crypto market. The TCJA’s elimination of the [“like-kind exchange”](https://www.investopedia.com/financial-edge/0110/10-things-to-know-about-1031-exchanges.aspx) loophole, which had allowed tax deferrals on crypto-to-crypto trades, had a notable impact on market behaviour. Investors could no longer delay taxes in the same way, prompting them to adjust their strategies. Although this may have reduced some speculative activity, it encouraged a shift toward greater transparency and regulation. At the same time, the tax cuts provided benefits to tech companies and startups, many of which began exploring blockchain and crypto ventures. By reinvesting their savings into these technologies, these companies contributed to the development of blockchain and decentralised finance. In this way, tax reform did not merely boost disposable income - it indirectly sparked innovation within the crypto space.

**Financial deregulation and the institutionalisation of crypto**

During the Trump presidency, a major focus was placed on financial deregulation, particularly with the scaling back of certain provisions in the [Dodd-Frank Act](https://www.11alive.com/article/news/verify/government-verify/dodd-frank-bank-regulations-rolled-back-trump-administration-2018-fact-check/536-13f83b14-7273-484d-81d2-b9f5994ba4b7). By easing regulations on banks and financial institutions, the goal was to stimulate capital movement and enhance investment opportunities and, although the deregulation primarily impacted traditional financial markets, it had an unintended yet significant effect on the cryptocurrency sector. As restrictions loosened, some institutional investors began to consider Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies as viable speculative assets, especially amid the global trade uncertainties. The shift in perception was also bolstered by evolving regulatory guidance; a significant milestone was reached when the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), under Trump, [enabled national banks to offer crypto custodial services](https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/news-releases/2021/nr-occ-2021-121.html). This move was a turning point, providing a defined regulatory framework that gave cryptocurrency more legitimacy among major institutional investors. Banks could now manage and safeguard digital assets for their clients so fostering a more secure, regulated space for institutional engagement. And, as crypto custodial services expanded, crypto derivatives also emerged, giving institutional investors a way to hedge their exposure to digital assets similarly to how traditional financial products function. These advancements not only boosted the credibility of cryptocurrencies but also facilitated the entry of larger players into the market, accelerating the institutional adoption of crypto. The combination of deregulation and the development of infrastructure such as custodial services and derivatives played a pivotal role in transitioning crypto from a niche asset to a more widely recognised investment option.

**Stimulus payments and retail crypto investment**

With [government stimulus checks](https://theharrispoll.com/briefs/stimulus-check-spending/) and low interest rates working in tandem, a perfect opportunity for retail crypto investment emerged. As millions of Americans received direct payments, many sought new avenues for their funds, leading a portion of them to the cryptocurrency market. And with its appeal as a hedge and speculative asset, Bitcoin also attracted significant attention. This surge in retail interest was magnified by social media, where younger investors - influenced by viral trends and online conversations - became more drawn to digital currencies. The notion of financial freedom and the ability to experiment with alternative investments had a strong resonance, especially with a generation deeply connected to digital platforms and fast information. Meanwhile, as retail interest in Bitcoin grew, so did [the appeal of decentralised finance (DeFi)](https://fxopen.com/blog/en/what-is-a-crypto-bull-run/). For many, DeFi represented a high-risk, high-reward space that promised exciting returns. With no intermediaries such as banks, DeFi allowed users to engage in lending, borrowing and yield farming - all on decentralised platforms. And for those already drawn into the crypto space by Bitcoin, DeFi offered the next frontier in investment. This combination of stimulus-driven funds, low-interest rates and the “social media effect” not only boosted retail crypto investment but also helped launch DeFi into the spotlight as an alternative space for experimentation and financial exploration.

In essence, Donald Trump’s first term significantly reshaped the cryptocurrency landscape with trade wars, tax reforms, deregulation and stimulus measures playing pivotal roles in the growing institutionalisation and retail adoption of digital assets. Bitcoin emerged as a hedge against geopolitical tensions and political risks, whilst tax reforms and financial deregulation catalysed investment in crypto ventures. Stimulus payments further fuelled retail interest and the expansion of custodial services and derivatives paved the way for institutional engagement in the crypto market. And, as we look ahead to a potential second term, the economic policies that once transformed the financial sector may continue to influence the future of cryptocurrencies. So, what lies ahead for the intersection of Trump’s economic agenda and the ever-evolving digital asset market? This will be explored in “Part 2: Trump - what a second term could mean for cryptocurrencies.”
