---
title: "Crypto payments: the gateway to mainstream adoption"
description: "Written by Kate Baucherel author of ‘Getting Started with Cryptocurrency’Bitcoin's blockchain has introduced reliable peer-to-peer payments but mainstream adoption is essential. Whilst viewed as risky in well-banked regions, crypto is a lifeline in areas with poor financial services, exemplified by stablecoin use in emerging economies and humanitarian efforts such as the UNHCR's stablecoin distribution in Ukraine. Integrating crypto with familiar platforms (e.g., Solana with Shopify, Ripple with banks, and PayPal's expanding crypto features) normalises its use."
date: 2024-06-18
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/crypto-payments-the-gateway-to-mainstream
year: 2024
---

# Crypto payments: the gateway to mainstream adoption

The Bitcoin blockchain gave us the first ‘honest ledger’ of value movement. By creating a reliable method of executing decentralised peer to peer payments, Satoshi Nakamoto laid the foundations of the huge variety of applications we see today. And, although the value that moves around the ledger now takes many forms, digital payments are still at the very heart of the matter and represent the most mature and rapidly growing use cases. Realising the potential of crypto assets and blockchain requires mainstream understanding and adoption among business decision makers and the wider public. But, in a society with high levels of financial inclusion and seamless fintech, the importance of that fundamental use case is lost. For people who don’t think they need peer to peer payments because the banks are doing their job, the focus shifts to headline-grabbing frauds and scams and reinforces the flawed perception that crypto is nothing more than a high-risk investment.

**Changing the narrative**

When I was asked to write the BCS User Guide to digital assets and blockchain, _‘Getting Started with Cryptocurrency’_ , it was important to build both familiarity and empathy with peer-to-peer payments. The restrictions of the format had to be considered. A book is a snapshot of a point in time but the innovative world of crypto is highly dynamic. It’s inevitable that things will change days, weeks and years after the final manuscript is set in stone, so any examples have to be well chosen - and it’s still easy to fall foul of current events. A story from Nigeria that they [and nineteen other African countries had partnered with Coinbase and stablecoin exchange Yellow Card](https://businessday.ng/technology/article/nigeria-19-other-countries-gain-usdc-access-as-coinbase-partners-yellow-card/#:~:text=Nigeria%20and%2019%20other%20African,the%20cost%20of%20fiat%20transfers.) to increase access to USDC and Bitcoin seemed like a great demonstration of crypto as a unit of exchange in day-to-day and cross-border payments and a store of value hedging against devaluation. As we now know, the Nigerian government subsequently took action against crypto exchanges and [jailed visiting Binance executives](https://www.reuters.com/technology/nigeria-sets-dangerous-precedent-by-detaining-binance-execs-ceo-says-2024-05-07/), a dreadful situation that has yet to be resolved - but crypto use continues, because people vote with their wallets.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!l9zb!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F1ddd17af-f619-4386-81b7-724e6bc22ec1_2441x3916.heic)

Source: BCS

**Building empathy**

We may not need crypto but other people do. The increase in stablecoin use, particularly in emerging economies, demonstrates that where banking systems are not able to provide good financial services or monetary stability. crypto steps into the breach. At The Digital Commonwealth’s Mansion House Summit on 2nd May, the Assistant Secretary General of the Commonwealth described this as ‘ _the social thunder of financial inclusion and growth_.’ For much of the world crypto is not an investment but a lifeline. Highlighting humanitarian efforts that use crypto payment rails emphasises the importance of peer-to-peer payments. In 2023, [the UNHCR](https://stellar.org/blog/thought-leadership/one-year-of-stellar-aid-assist) won an award for a pilot with Stellar to distribute cash to people displaced by the war in Ukraine. They issued stablecoins to secure smartphone wallets that could be used for direct payment or off ramped to fiat through the MoneyGram network. Once you know to look, many other stories emerge. Argentinian company [Xcapit, supported by Unicef](https://www.unicefventurefund.org/story/xcapit-secures-growth-funding-develop-digital-wallet-offline-users), has developed a Low-Tech Wallet for offline users, that builds the receipt of money into old phone tech. This enables peer to peer payments in humanitarian initiatives and for unconnected refugees, reducing financial exclusion. DePIN pioneers World Mobile provide an essential service - internet access - and in doing so bring their customers into the crypto ecosystem and improve financial inclusion. Building empathy is not the ultimate goal. It’s a tool to educate and also a way of identifying opportunities. As crypto payments gather wider adoption, the infrastructure needs investment. Global North investors would do well to look at the potential of Global South solutions that are based on lived experience.

**Payments in familiar settings**

Crypto rails under familiar applications are guaranteed to raise eyebrows among the mainstream audience. The normalisation of crypto payments in the global fintech ecosystem is growing. Solana’s payments infrastructure integrates with Shopify. Ripple sits beneath cross-border and foreign exchange applications in an increasing number of banks. The most high-profile development is arguably PayPal’s crypto strategy. From early days of allowing users to buy crypto within the platform, functionality has started to roll out with increasing rapidity. [PayPal’s Senior VP of Crypto, Jose Fernandez da Ponte,](https://www.cnbc.com/2023/08/08/paypal-crypto-chief-jose-fernandez-da-ponte-on-battling-tether-usdc.html) sees the platform as a conduit between fiat and digital currencies, abstracting the complexity of wallets and keys for easy adoption of rapid payment rails. People will use a tool if it offers convenience and financial advantage, and normalising crypto within these familiar payments network may be the ultimate onboarding tool regardless of how comfortable people are with their current banking arrangements. PayPal aims to match the speed and volume of Visa, and recently announced that PYUSD is now available on Solana in addition to Ethereum. Will this be the killer payments app we have been looking for? PayPal’s stablecoin has also given another boost to the development of Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDCs). When [Facebook proposed its Libra](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/jun/18/what-is-libra-facebook-new-cryptocurrency) stablecoin back in 2018, central banks recognised that 2 billion people using a Facebook coin might disrupt monetary stability (in the same way that Nigeria is blaming access to stablecoins for the devaluation of the Naira). In October 2023, [François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of Banque de France](https://twitter.com/EconWithNick/status/1788548977979228393), said, “ _Paypal’s project of a global stablecoin for retail payments is a stark reminder that if we don’t take the initiative, someone else will_.”

**Looking to the future**

Crypto and crypto rails are front and centre of the future of global payments. They may be hidden in plain sight under apps we already use or become second nature as wallet-to-wallet transfers with just a quick scan of a QR code. There will, however, be challenges on the road ahead. When something is faster and cheaper, the market will adopt it. It will not wait for regulators to catch up, and it may not even wait for the carefully considered designs of CBDCs to reach fruition. A historical approach to protection of consumers, innovators and economies butting up against a genuine transformation of payments technology is going to cause friction. When such a fundamental shift happens, change is not an option. Our only choice is how to react[. The Commonwealth’s Model Law for Virtual Asset Service Providers](https://www.digit.fyi/the-commonwealth-passes-model-laws-for-the-digital-economy/) is a good example of a practical step that will enable a responsible approach to financial inclusion and growth in emerging economies. Industry leaders are in the perfect position to support both innovation and regulation, managing the inevitable changes that are coming.

Bitcoin's blockchain introduced the first reliable peer-to-peer payment system, setting the stage for the diverse digital financial applications we see today. Despite the potential, mainstream adoption is hindered by perceptions of crypto as high-risk, especially in financially stable regions. However, in underbanked areas, crypto provides critical financial services and stability, stepping in where traditional banking falls short. Humanitarian efforts, like the UNHCR's use of stablecoins for Ukrainian refugees, highlight crypto's role as a lifeline, not just an investment. Looking ahead, the challenge will be to balance rapid technological adoption with regulatory oversight. Initiatives like the Commonwealth's Model Law for Virtual Asset Service Providers exemplify a responsible approach to financial inclusion and innovation. The future of global finance lies in the successful integration of crypto payments, offering faster, cheaper, and more inclusive solutions
