---
title: "Digital money and gig economy (Part 1)"
description: "The gig economy is growing as more staff work remote or hybrid and employees shift from traditional full-time employment to more flexible, short-term work facilitated by digital platforms such as Fiverr and Upwork. But, whilst the gig economy offers benefits such as autonomy, flexibility and accessibility to a wide range of workers, it also presents challenges such as income instability, lack of job security and exploitation risks due to the independent contractor status of gig workers. This article also points out the significant role digital money plays in this evolving labour market, with more insights in part 2."
date: 2024-09-24
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/digital-money-and-gig-economy-part
year: 2024
---

# Digital money and gig economy (Part 1)

[The gig economy](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/g/gig-economy.asp) represents a significant shift in the labour market, characterised by the rise of temporary, flexible jobs and often facilitated by digital platforms. Instead of traditional full-time employment with benefits and long-term job security, the gig economy emphasises short-term contracts, freelance work and independent contracting. This model has recently gained considerable traction, driven by technological advancements, changing economic conditions and evolving work preferences. Indeed in the US, recent labour statistics have highlighted that in the last 12 months there has been a fall in fulltime employment of 1.6 million whilst part time gig-work had increased by 1.8 million.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!pJjO!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fca0fca07-c66f-4b83-ba45-e462649d2b24_1068x1050.png)

Source: [X (Twitter)](https://x.com/RealEJAntoni/status/1809211495953187160)

Boosted in part by the global COVID-19 pandemic, gig working has increased as more and more people work remotely, having been estimated in the UK that: [“The size of the UK gig economy is 3-5% of total employment, compared to 10-12% of wider casual work.”](https://x.com/j_schneebacher/status/1750536131576463360) Gig working is defined by several key characteristics that distinguish it from traditional employment models:

> · **short-term and flexible work** \- gig work is typically short-term, with workers engaged in tasks or projects that may last from a few hours to a few months. This flexibility allows workers to choose when and where they work, often leading to a more autonomous work-life balance. However, this also means that workers may face periods of uncertainty and instability between gigs.
> 
> · **digital platforms as intermediaries** \- a defining feature of the gig economy is the role of digital platforms which act as intermediaries between workers and consumers. With platforms such [Uber](https://www.uber.com/ng/en/), [TaskRabbit](https://www.taskrabbit.com/) and [Upwork](https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/UPWK/) (valued at over $1.2billion) one can advertise for a specific task, e.g. help with social media posts, build a website or, in the case of [Fiverr](https://www.fiverr.com/), connect gig workers with customers who need its services. In addition, these platforms often handle logistics such as payments, reviews and job postings, making it easier for workers to find and complete gigs.
> 
> · **independent contracting** \- gig workers are typically classified as independent contractors rather than employees. This classification has significant implications for their legal status, including the lack of traditional employee benefits such as health insurance, paid leave and retirement plans. Independent contractors are typically responsible for managing their taxes, health insurance and other financial obligations.
> 
> · **diverse range of gigs** \- the gig economy encompasses a wide variety of jobs, ranging from low-skilled tasks such as food delivery and ridesharing, to highly specialised freelance work such as graphic design, programming and consulting. This diversity both allows workers from different backgrounds and skill levels to participate in the gig economy and also creates a broad spectrum of job quality and income levels.
> 
> · **task-based compensation** \- in the gig economy, workers are typically paid on a per-task or per-project basis, rather than receiving a regular salary. This means that income can be highly variable, depending on the availability of gigs, the worker's skills and the rates offered by clients or platforms. Whilst some workers can earn a substantial income through gig work, others may struggle with inconsistent earnings.

Essentially, the gig economy offers several benefits, both for workers and for the companies and consumers who utilise their services. One of the primary attractions of the gig economy for workers is the flexibility it offers; gig workers can choose when and where they work, allowing them to tailor their work schedules to fit their personal lives. This flexibility is particularly appealing to those with caregiving responsibilities, students, retirees or individuals who prefer non-traditional work hours. Additionally, gig workers have the autonomy to choose the types of gigs they take on, allowing them to pursue work that aligns with their interests and skills - over [35million](https://www.localyze.com/blog/digital-nomad-statistics-trends-2023-2024) people globally are now defining themselves as digital nomads. Furthermore, this economy provides opportunities for individuals to earn extra income, whether as a primary source of income or as a supplement to a traditional job. This can be particularly valuable during economic downturns or periods of unemployment, as gig work offers a way to generate money quickly. Additionally, the gig economy allows people to monetise assets, such as cars (through ridesharing) or homes (through short-term rentals). And with the number of people being paid to play games expanding globally, companies such as [IKEA are even paying people to play the on-line gamer Roblox](https://eu.azcentral.com/story/entertainment/media/2024/06/04/roblox-ikea-job-how-to-apply/73971345007/).

Moreover, many gig economy jobs have relatively low barriers to entry, making them accessible to a wide range of people. For example, becoming a driver for a ride-sharing service often requires little more than a driver's license, a car and a smartphone. This accessibility allows individuals who might otherwise struggle to find employment (such as those without formal education or work experience) to participate in the labour market. For businesses, the gig economy offers a flexible labour force that can be scaled up or down depending on demand. This can lead to increased efficiency and cost savings since companies can hire workers on a project-by-project basis without the long-term commitment and overhead costs associated with traditional employment. The gig economy also fosters innovation by enabling companies to tap into a global pool of talent for specialised tasks, often at a lower cost than hiring full-time employees. And, for consumers, the gig economy provides a convenient way to access a wide range of services on demand. Whether ordering food, hiring a ride or finding a freelance graphic designer, consumers benefit from the speed, accessibility and variety of services offered through gig economy platforms - this convenience undoubtedly contributing to the widespread adoption of gig economy services in many aspects of daily life.

Yet, despite its advantages, the gig economy also presents several challenges and has faced criticism for its impact on workers, businesses and society as a whole. One of the most significant criticisms of the gig economy is the lack of job security and benefits for workers. Gig workers are typically classified as independent contractors, which means they are not entitled to traditional employee benefits such as health insurance, paid leave, retirement plans or unemployment insurance; this lack of a safety net can leave gig workers vulnerable to financial instability, particularly during periods of low demand or personal emergencies. Furthermore, the nature of gig work, with its reliance on short-term contracts and task-based compensation, can lead to significant income volatility. Unlike traditional employees who receive a steady monthly income, gig workers' income can fluctuate widely from week to week or month to month, depending on the availability of gigs and their ability to secure work. This unpredictability runs the risk of jeopardising the need to budget, save and plan for the future. Furthermore, critics argue that the gig economy can perpetuate exploitation and power imbalances between workers and platforms. Gig workers often have little bargaining power and may be subject to low pay, unfavourable working conditions and unilateral changes in platform policies. Additionally, the algorithms used by gig economy platforms to distribute work and determine pay can be opaque, leading to concerns about fairness and transparency. Not least of all is that gig workers are responsible for managing their taxes, including paying self-employment taxes, which can be complex and burdensome. Many gig workers may not be fully aware of their tax obligations or may struggle to set aside enough money to cover their tax liabilities, leading to financial difficulties. Moreover, the legal classification of gig workers as independent contractors has been the subject of ongoing debate and litigation, with implications for labour rights/protections. Certainly a moot point is whether a gig worker is classified in a similar way to a full time since this [varies from one jurisdiction to another.](https://www.nortonrosefulbright.com/en-gb/knowledge/publications/87afaec5/doing-business-in-the-gig-economy-a-global-guide-for-employers)

In the second article we will look at a range of ways that digital money is being used in the gig economy.
