---
title: "The impact of stablecoins on banks' balance sheets in the EU"
description: "Stablecoins, which are tied to stable assets such as fiat currencies, are transforming the financial landscape by providing quicker and more affordable payment options whilst minimising volatility. Stablecoins present challenges to conventional liquidity management and regulatory capital standards, especially when compared to CBDCs and traditional banking frameworks. European banks are required to hold additional capital for deposits placed at the central bank - which impacts a banks’ balance sheets in a way that is not the case in other jurisdictions. This could result in EU bank-issued stablecoins’ collateral being riskier, i.e. not as stable."
date: 2024-11-18
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/the-impact-of-stablecoins-on-banks
year: 2024
---

# The impact of stablecoins on banks' balance sheets in the EU

Stablecoins, a type of digital currency typically anchored to fiat money (i.e. £, $ €), are emerging as a disruptive force within the financial sector. Given that [cross-border payments are projected to reach $182 trillion p.a.](https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Finance/Japan-megabanks-to-tap-blockchain-and-SWIFT-for-instant-trade-payments), financial institutions are looking for ways to effect such transactions faster and cheaper. Three of Japan’s biggest banks have announced they are to use SWIFT and a blockchain-based framework for instant international payments using stablecoins tied to various currencies. The aim is to enable transactions to occur in under a second, significantly reducing costs and time compared to the traditional SWIFT system, which can take hours. By leveraging existing SWIFT infrastructure, the banks can avoid substantial new investments and, because sending and receiving banks must support stablecoins, this ought to act as a stimulus for broader adoption of blockchain technology. However, stablecoins ascent also brings challenges, particularly for conventional banks. In the EU, the impact of stablecoins could be significant, potentially altering banks' balance sheet management by affecting liquidity, capital requirements and competitive pressures. Recognising these potential effects is vital for adapting to the evolving financial landscape and preserving the stability of EU banking institutions. With the rising popularity of stablecoins, traditional banks face a significant risk of disintermediation. Customers may choose stablecoins because they offer greater efficiency, faster transaction speeds and reduced costs compared to traditional banking options. Moreover, when deposits are shifted to stablecoins, banks lose an essential source of funding - for instance, if 5-10% of depositors transition their funds to stablecoins, banks would have to secure alternative (possibly more costly) sources of liquidity to continue their operations; this scenario could drive up funding costs and limit their ability to provide inexpensive loans.

In 2023, [stablecoins had a global market capitalisation of over $182 billion,](https://www.coingecko.com/en/categories/stablecoins) with further growth anticipated as firms such as PayPal, Ripple and a variety of banks offer stablecoins. Given that, typically, capital be derived from traditional bank deposits, banks could face significant consequences as it is usual practice for banks to use customers deposits to support their lending capabilities - which could drive up borrowing costs for both businesses and individuals and influence the overall economy. This trend highlights the importance of banks adapting to the evolving financial landscape, with the shift impacting banks' liquidity management because they may need to rely on alternative and what can be more costly funding sources, thus impacting a banks’ financial stability. Stablecoins, regulated primarily as payment instruments, are designed for transactions rather than long-term savings, hence their reserves must be both stable and highly liquid to facilitate immediate redemptions. Consequently, stablecoin issuers typically hold their reserves in low-risk, liquid assets. Of note, under European MiCAR regulations, a [minimum of 30% of these assets](https://www.eba.europa.eu/sites/default/files/document_library/Publications/Consultations/2024/Consultation%20on%20RTS%20further%20specifying%20the%20liquidity%20requirements%20of%20the%20reserve%20of%20assets%20under%20MiCAR/1063471/CP%20RTS%20further%20specifying%20the%20liquidity%20requirements%20of%20the%20reserve%20of%20assets%20Article%2036\(4\)%20MiCAR.pdf) must be deposited in banks if the issuer is an e-money institution.

Meanwhile, when a bank issues stablecoins, liquidity risks arise from redemption-related outflows; banks must maintain high-quality liquid assets (HQLAs) to meet short-term needs, as stipulated by the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR). A higher LCR, which is crucial for ensuring financial stability, requires banks to hold sufficient HQLAs against anticipated outflows. Stablecoin-related deposits, often facing a 100% outflow rate, compel banks to maintain an equivalent amount of HQLAs, potentially straining their liquidity and lending capabilities. Stablecoins also influence regulatory capital requirements and leverage ratios differently in the EU and the US - in the US, [central bank reserves are excluded from leverage ratio calculations](https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/01/27/2019-28293/regulatory-capital-rule-revisions-to-the-supplementary-leverage-ratio-to-exclude-certain-central) under the Regulatory Capital Rule (2020). This means that when a bank receives money for its stablecoin and deposits these funds at the central bank, [there is no impact on its leverage ratio](https://www.ledgerinsights.com/ecb-paper-explores-unattractiveness-of-stablecoin-deposits-for-banks/?ct=t\(EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_8_31_2024_15_1\)&mc_cid=319767568e&mc_eid=562a6d0508). This exemption is designed to maintain financial stability and smooth monetary policy transmission by allowing banks to hold central bank deposits without affecting their leverage metrics. As a result, US banks can manage stablecoin deposits more flexibly, as these deposits do not contribute to leverage constraints. This scenario is the same in the UK, where money placed at the Bank of England is also excluded from liquidity ratios. Conversely, EU banks do not benefit from this exemption. Under current regulations, stablecoin deposits held at the central bank in the EU are included in the leverage ratio calculation which can strain regulatory capital requirements. The European Central Bank's guidelines suggest that whilst temporary exemptions may be considered, they are generally accompanied by higher minimum leverage ratio requirements. Consequently, EU banks may face tighter capital constraints and limited balance sheet growth when accommodating stablecoin deposits. Certainly, this difference in regulatory treatment could influence banks' strategic decisions on where to engage with stablecoin issuers, potentially favouring jurisdictions with more lenient leverage ratio regulations.

Meanwhile, the development of central bank digital currencies (CBDCs), such as a possible digital euro, introduces a [major competitive threat to stablecoins](https://www.vegaitglobal.com/media-center/business-insights/the-future-of-stablecoins-and-cbdcs-competition-or-complementarity). CBDCs are crafted to offer a government-backed digital option that might deliver superior stability and broader acceptance compared to stablecoins, which are often underpinned by private assets. Should the European Central Bank launch a digital euro, it could entice both retail and institutional users away from stablecoins by offering the reliability of central bank backing and smooth integration with existing financial systems. The rise of CBDCs may also lead to a fragmented financial ecosystem, where both CBDCs and stablecoins co-exist but create complexities for banks in managing their balance sheets. Banks could face increased competitive pressure as they navigate between maintaining traditional deposits, accommodating new digital currencies and managing the implications of a diversified currency landscape. This fragmentation might complicate liquidity management and alter competitive dynamics within the financial sector. Furthermore, the rise in stablecoin adoption for transactions poses a significant threat to traditional banks reducing reliance on traditional bank payment systems. Furthermore, this transition could significantly affect banks' revenue streams; traditionally, banks generate substantial income from transaction fees and payment processing. A major decrease in these activities due to the rising use of stablecoins could lead to a marked decline in their revenue impacting profitability and their balance sheets. The [European Central Bank (ECB)](https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecb.op278~3e1f6c8791.en.pdf) and the [Bank for International Settlements (BIS)](https://www.bis.org/fsi/publ/insights57.htm) have both looked at risks stablecoins may be exposed to when it comes to cyber security, anti-money laundering and controls to prevent financing of terrorism.

Typically, stablecoins hold security high-quality assets (such as government bonds) to maintain their value relative to fiat currencies. However, [the issuance or holding of stablecoins carries both market and credit risks](https://www.spglobal.com/_Assets/documents/Ratings/Product-PDFs/SSA_Brochure_Launch_Edition.pdf). For instance, if a bank issues stablecoins backed by government bonds, fluctuations in bond prices caused by interest rate changes or geopolitical events can affect the stability of these reserves. Consider a scenario where a bank issues $1 billion in stablecoins, with its reserves held in government bonds. Should interest rates increase significantly, leading to a 5% drop in bond prices, the value of the reserves could fall by $50 million. This decline in asset value might threaten the stability of the stablecoin and exert substantial pressure on the bank’s financial health. Correspondingly, if the government bonds experience a downgrade or encounter credit risks, the stability of the stablecoin could be further jeopardised. This kind of volatility in reserve values not only affects the bank’s profitability but also raises systemic risk, potentially leading to financial instability and greater regulatory oversight. These risks underscore the importance of strong risk management and careful reserve management strategies.

Stablecoins are making a significant impact on the financial industry by facilitating faster and cheaper international payments. The way that the EU treats central bank deposits could mean that those banks wishing to offer stablecoins will be forced to hold riskier, higher yielding assets as opposed to central bank deposits. As the name suggests, stablecoins are designed not to be volatile - yet this unintended consequence could result in commercial banks creating new forms of digital money which are not stable. Thus, in Europe, driving out competition and innovation and leaving the only real option for consumers an ECB digital euro that does not pay interest. Ultimately, is this then in the best interests of consumers to face limited choice whilst other jurisdictions will be able to select from a much wider selection of stablecoin providers?
