---
title: "Beyond Bitcoin: the race for crypto ETFs and how other digital assets are following"
description: "The approval of spot Bitcoin ETFs in the US marks a turning point for the entire cryptocurrency sector and potentially traditional finance. Whilst this opens doors for wider investor participation in cryptos, overall ETF availability for various cryptocurrencies seems promising. However, regulatory hurdles and ongoing debates around security classification could significantly impact the landscape. So, it will be interesting to see how the SEC approaches future ETF applications and what effect this has on cryptocurrency adoption and market stability."
date: 2024-07-09
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/beyond-bitcoin-the-race-for-crypto
year: 2024
---

# Beyond Bitcoin: the race for crypto ETFs and how other digital assets are following

The once-fringe**** world of cryptocurrency has seen a surge of legitimacy in recent years with a significant milestone being the advent of exchange-traded funds (ETFs) tied to digital assets being allowed to be issued in 2024. Indeed, time and time again at the Goldman Sachs Digital Asset conference in London in June institutions spoke of how significant the creation of Bitcoin ETFs has been. Many spoke that since this happened, US regulators appear to be looking at crypto in a slightly more positive manner. Although ProShares had [launched ](https://www.investopedia.com/investing/understanding-cryptocurrency-etfs/#:~:text=The%20ProShares%20Bitcoin%20Strategy%20ETF,U.S.%20market%20in%20January%202024.)the first US Bitcoin futures ETF in October 2021, the SEC has only approved [spot Bitcoin ETFs this year.](https://www.investopedia.com/investing/understanding-cryptocurrency-etfs/#:~:text=The%20ProShares%20Bitcoin%20Strategy%20ETF,U.S.%20market%20in%20January%202024.) And, according to Bloomberg, leading up to the beginning of June, Bitcoin ETFs accounted for [26% of BlackRock’s and 56% of Fidelity’s](https://x.com/EricBalchunas/status/1797647979232567805) new funds, thus highlighting the importance of these ETFs for such sizable asset management firms.

This journey, however, has not been straightforward. Whilst acknowledging the potential of these ETFs, regulators have voiced concerns about volatility and underlying asset custody, forcing issuers to navigate a complex and arduous approval process that varies significantly by country. Spot ETFs, such as BlackRock and Fidelity, that have been granted permission to be issued this year, [hold actual Bitcoins](https://www.bankrate.com/investing/best-bitcoin-etfs/) whereby allowing investors access to the cryptocurrency within a well-known regulated framework. Previously, only Bitcoin futures ETFs were available, tracking the price of futures contracts but not directly holding the cryptocurrency. This SEC approval opens the door for a broader range of investors, including those unfamiliar with the complexities of how to directly buy and hold a cryptocurrency (such as Bitcoin), so giving them exposure to the cryptocurrency market. However, the arrival of these BTC ETFs could equally bring Bitcoin more stability and legitimacy, further solidifying its position in the financial market. Furthermore, whilst Bitcoin ETFs are gaining approvals all over the world, many other cryptocurrencies are also following its path. Ethereum has scaled the first of two stages before its ETF has hit the market - the approval process for the first-ever spot Ethereum ETFs is [nearing completion](https://cryptodaily.co.uk/2024/06/gensler-secs-ethereum-etf-approval-process-on-track) and, as of May 23, the SEC had already reviewed and commented on potential issuers' initial documents (19b-4 forms). The asset management firms that are interested in launching an Ethereum ETF include VanEck, Franklin, Grayscale, Fidelity, Bitwise, ARK Invest & 21Shares, BlackRock and Invesco & Galaxy. However, the second and final hurdle remains - approval of the S-1 registration statements and, according to analysts, this final step could take months potentially delaying the launch of these long-awaited ETFs. The consensus is that those ETFs that hold spot Ethereum will be available for investors before the US November elections since [crypto and Web3 are becoming part of political issues](https://www.disruptionbanking.com/2024/06/26/us-elections-what-are-the-candidates-saying-about-crypto/). But, although the wait continues, the initial approval marks a significant step forward for Ethereum and the cryptocurrency industry.

So, whilst a futures-based Solana ETF is not available in the US, investors seeking Solana exposure can look at alternative products. [Grayscale Solana Trust (GSOL)](https://www.grayscale.com/crypto-products/grayscale-solana-trust) is a closed-end fund similar to an ETF but with a fixed number of shares, meaning its price may differ from the actual value of Solana it holds. Another option is the VanEck Solana [ETN](https://www.etf.com/sections/etf-basics/etn-vs-etf-whats-difference), a debt security that tracks Solana's price but does not directly own Solana itself. However, unlike ETFs, underlying assets of ETNs cannot be redeemed for cash. But analysts [suggest](https://coinmarketcap.com/community/articles/665b1c5b6f50af68bd85beaa/) that a potential Solana ETF approval in 2024 could fuel a price breakout above the $250 resistance level, leading to an extended uptrend for SOL - in a bullish scenario, the price could reach a price of $637. However, it is important to remember that ETF approval is not guaranteed, and the cryptocurrency market remains volatile. As of June 2024, a growing number of countries worldwide are now embracing Bitcoin ETFs. The US finally approved the first physically backed Bitcoin ETFs in January 2024, following in the footsteps of countries such as Canada, Germany, Switzerland and [Australia](https://cryptonews.com/news/australias-first-spot-bitcoin-etf-sets-to-begin-trading-on-exchange.htm). Thailand also recently joined the list, though its first Bitcoin ETF is limited to institutional investors for now. Meanwhile, regulators in South Korea, Japan and Singapore could follow Hong Kong's lead as Asia responds to spot Bitcoin ETF approval in the US. Certainly, this trend suggests a growing acceptance of Bitcoin as an investable asset class and regulatory willingness to create avenues for investor participation.

Meanwhile, whilst in conversation with [Consensys](https://www.cnbc.com/video/2024/05/31/ripple-ceo-crypto-industry-in-the-us-dealing-with-hostile-regulatory-environment.html), Brad Garlinghouse, from Ripple, [sees a future](https://ambcrypto.com/xrp-solana-cardano-etfs-are-all-inevitable-ripples-garlinghouse/) where there will be ETFs for other cryptocurrencies including [Solana (SOL)](https://ambcrypto.com/category/solana-news/), Cardano (ADA), and even Ripple's XRP: “ _I think it’s just a matter of time, and it’s inevitable there’s gonna be an XRP ETF, there’s gonna be a Solana ETF, there’s gonna be a Cardano ETF, and that’s great_.” Similar to Garlinghouse's prediction of spot ETFs for other major cryptos, CNBC's, Brian Kelly, has [resonated](https://ambcrypto.com/could-solana-be-next-in-line-for-a-spot-etf-after-ethereum/) with this sentiment by suggesting Solana could be next. This also aligns with Cathie Wood from Ark Investments who, as reported by the [New York Times](file:///Users/susanneharris/Library/Containers/com.apple.mail/Data/Library/Mail%20Downloads/DABF4DE7-9222-4D6B-AF49-3CCB3AA55A78/Cathie%20Wood%20from%20Ark%20Investments%20%20view%20that%20crypto's%20growing%20influence%20is%20attracting%20political%20attention), asserts that crypto's growing influence is attracting political attention, potentially paving the way for wider ETF approval. And, the Securities and Exchange Commission ([SEC’s) insistence on classifying Solana as a security](https://cryptoadventure.com/xrp-lawyer-challenges-secs-cryptocurrency-classification-ethereum-vs-solana-and-cardano/) impacts the possibility of a SOL ETF in the US; the Commission has more stringent regulations for approving ETFs holding securities than those based on commodities. The SEC classifies all cryptocurrencies as securities except Bitcoin, so the road to becoming ETFs might be more arduous for other cryptos. However, this stance means a Solana ETF would face greater scrutiny from the SEC, making the approval process longer but not necessarily impossible - even the now-revered Bitcoin took years before a spot ETF was approved.

Essentially, approving a spot Bitcoin ETF has sparked concerns about a flood of similar products for less-established cryptocurrencies. These lesser-known currencies, often called “shitcoins”, could weaken the overall legitimacy of the crypto market and, worryingly, if this trend continues, the market might resemble an unregulated free-for-all. So, this raises questions about the future direction of cryptocurrency investments. It would seem challenges certainly exist for regulators to keep pace with technological innovation so as to ensure stability whilst also fostering growth. As ETFs for cryptocurrencies (such as Bitcoin and Ethereum) gain acceptance, are we therefore on the verge of a new financial era, or is the volatility and regulatory uncertainty too great a risk? Ultimately, how will these developments reshape our understanding of money and value in the digital age….?
