---
title: "Lessons from the Bristol Pound Project and thoughts on digital "
description: "Written by Diana Finch, former MD of the Bristol Pound and author of Value Beyond Money. The world-famous Bristol Pound local currency looks beyond localisation currencies to imagine the full potential of new technologies to change our socio-economic system. Whilst money is a tool for markets and creates a de facto and failing governance system for the world, a correctly designed form of payment could provide the building blocks of a commons-based economy."
date: 2024-09-10
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/lessons-from-the-bristol-pound-project
year: 2024
---

# Lessons from the Bristol Pound Project and thoughts on digital 

Bristol Pound was arguably totally ahead of itself as it created a new way that payments could happen with both paper and digital money, while weaving in a strong community focus to support Bristol and its economy. As the former Managing Director of the Bristol Pound, I believe there are some lessons that other new digital money instruments may find useful. I was involved managing the project from mid-2018 and envisage a future of different experiments made possible by new technologies. One of the key potential uses of distributed ledger technology (DLT) is in the evolution of the economic system. New technologies offer new tools and the opportunity to approach problems differently. If you only have a hammer, you treat everything as a nail. Until now, this has been the situation for economic activists, valiantly attempting to create novel economic solutions with only the limited tools of the past. 

 _“The Bristol Pound operated from 2012 to 2021. It was the first local currency to have digital and paper money from the outset, and the first to enable the payment of local taxes in the local currency._

_Its aim was to raise awareness of the importance of localisation of trade, for reasons such as reducing food miles (and thus reducing CO2 emissions) and building community wealth by trapping money in the local economy.”_

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!O1_I!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F9bae851e-7a7c-4da6-9150-295764a30666_1002x562.png)

Source: [Bristol Pound Legacy](https://www.bristolpoundlegacy.info/)

Conversations about the Bristol Pound often start with economic concepts like the ‘local multiplier effect’. For a change, I’m going to focus on the functions and attributes of money and tokens, as this is where the important lessons are for the crypto projects of today. The Bristol Pound currency itself did not particularly challenge the creation of money. All money converted to Bristol Pounds originated as GBP Sterling and, as such, was mainly created by commercial bank debt. But right from the start, the founders wanted to develop a type of mutual credit system to go alongside the Bristol Pound. This had the potential to reduce reliance on bank money created through debt and speed up invoice settlement. 

**Credit clearing circle - invoices can just be cancelled**

Bristol Pound never managed to get its planned credit clearing circle off the ground. Businesses were reluctant to commit in the main because they felt there was too much risk in extending credit to fellow businesses. If a business in debt to the circle went bust, there would not be enough money in the system for everyone to be paid. Of course, even with mainstream money, if a business goes under, it may well leave creditors. Doing business on the basis of invoices with payment terms is inherently risky. But such losses are not usually blamed on the money system. In mutual credit, they are. The problem here is that in mutual credit operations, each settlement is its own transaction. The settlements described in the above diagram happen sequentially. If a business goes bust between transactions - having received settlement for a sales invoice but without settling purchase invoices to the same amount - the impact is felt by the rest of the loop.

The work of [Tomaž Fleischmann](https://www.mdpi.com/1911-8074/13/12/295) is revolutionary because the algorithms he developed enable loops of transactions to be identified from pooled invoice data and settled instantly. The overall impact is that the amount of bank money needed to settle remaining invoices is significantly reduced. There is no risk to any of the businesses, as all settlements are simultaneous. For such a system to work in an open network, all potential participants need to be able to upload their invoices according to a protocol. The system should not rely on a trusted agency to maintain the ledger, and all the data should be sovereign to the companies who uploaded it. I see this as an ideal use of DLT in the economy as we transition away from the worst impacts of the current financial system.

**Fungibility**

There are two ways of understanding fungibility. In blockchain we often focus on non-fungibility: non-fungible tokens (NFTs) are unique, in that no single NFT is identical to or can be substituted by another. But there is a wider common definition - if one thing can be substituted by another thing of equal value, it is fungible. It is this later meaning that is relevant when examining the Bristol Pound. The Bristol Pound was less fungible than Sterling, as it could only be used to purchase from local businesses. The non-fungibility of Bristol Pounds against goods from large national and international chain stores, in effect, recognised the additional social and economic value of localisation. Whilst the exchange rate between Bristol Pounds and pounds Sterling was one to one, once converted the money was less fungible. (If you had a digital Bristol Pound account, you could convert Bristol Pounds back to sterling, rendering the money fully fungible once more.) This is quite similar to what is happening in cryptocurrency systems. People who get paid in an alternative currency will immediately convert it to a more fungible currency, either Bitcoin, Ethereum or their fiat currency.

The Bristol Pound experiment ran for nine years. In many ways it was ground-breaking: it was the first local currency to kick off with digital as well as paper money, and the first to be accepted in payment of local taxes. In its first three years it grew to be the largest complementary currency of its type. However, the growth then halted and the decline started. The reasons for this are largely to do with how it was marketed. In similar ways to many blockchain start-ups, the initial marketing focused on the likely early adopters: in this case, the people who already agreed with the premise that localisation was important. The promise to business members was that they would gain new customers because people would be looking for places to spend their special money. In reality, business members instead tended to find that existing customers started paying with Bristol Pounds: the people joining the scheme were already supporters of local businesses.

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!8pvT!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fbdc99b11-0c81-4b27-af9c-fc59b9343514_620x868.png)

Two things happened. First, once we had onboarded the early adopters who thought like us, nobody else joined: we had inadvertently created an ideological barrier to growth. Secondly, once businesses saw that the promised growth in footfall wasn’t happening, there was little reason for them to stay in the system - which frankly was an administrative burden they could do without. When early adopters started to find it harder to spend their Bristol Pounds, the circulation went on a downward spiral. Again, I think many crypto projects can see the same pattern: difficulty onboarding regular people and the currency going into a downwards spiral and, most importantly of all, the need to grow a strong and active community. The problem was that we were really undertaking a behaviour change project, not that we had conceived of it as such initially. This realisation made us start to think very differently about how we might design any follow-up project to the Bristol Pound currency. Rather than starting with money, we would start with behaviours that create social and environmental value. We would then try to make visible that value creation and flow through ‘current-sees’, a term coined by [Art Brock](https://www.artbrock.com/metacurrency/resources). 

The ‘current-sees’ could be tokens, but these tokens would operate very differently to money. They would not be designed to mediate market transactions. Rather, each would be non-fungible, counting a unique action or item. By using DLT, we could create a record that could outlast our organisation and potentially be used by others, creating an open and indelible record of value creation - and potentially in the longer term, value destruction too. We imagined the app as a Fitbit, giving the user a view of their social and environmental impact but, importantly, being able to see their effect in context. For example, one idea was a token to mark the rewilding of a square metre of a garden or back yard that was previously paved or covered in Astroturf. The number of rewilding tokens created would be visible to all, perhaps with metadata showing the location. The people doing the rewilding would feel part of a collaborative effort. The ‘current-see’ would make visible the scale of the effort, helping to move the new behaviour into the realm of ‘normal’. The tokens would not be tradable for anything, but the tokens in one’s wallet would accumulate like points in a game. The token data could also then be correlated with improvements in biodiversity over time.

This is where I see the real potential of blockchain - to create records to account for values that money ignores; to move our thinking away from competition and consumption and towards collaboration and care. The monetary applications of the Bristol Pound created little impact, but the ideas for non-financial tokens have the potential to create major shifts in society. I think this learning has huge relevance for the Web3 community.
