---
title: "Tokenised government bonds"
description: "Tokenised government bonds are digital versions of traditional bonds issued on a blockchain, offering increased accessibility, liquidity and efficiency by enabling 24/7 trading with near-instant settlement times. They reduce the need for intermediaries whereby potentially lowering costs and democratising access to government debt markets. However, challenges such as regulatory uncertainty, technological infrastructure requirements and risks to financial stability must be addressed before they become mainstream. Tokenisation could significantly reshape financial markets, but its future depends on technological advances, regulatory developments and market adoption."
date: 2024-10-01
source: https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/tokenised-government-bonds
year: 2024
---

# Tokenised government bonds

[Tokenised government bonds](https://www.ledgerinsights.com/tokenized-bonds/) are digital representations of traditional government bonds on a [blockchain or distributed ledger technology (DLT)](https://www.deloitte.com/lu/en/services/consulting/services/blockchain-distributed-ledger-technology-stitch-in-time.html). Unlike conventional bonds, which are typically issued in physical or dematerialised form and traded through traditional financial institutions, tokenised bonds exist as digital tokens on a blockchain. These tokens represent ownership of the underlying government bond and entitle the holder to the same rights and obligations as a traditional bondholder, including the receipt of periodic interest payments (coupons) and the return of principal at maturity. According to S&P Global:” “ _The[global bond market was valued at $135 trillion](https://www.indexologyblog.com/2024/02/08/bond-beginnings-and-beyond/), with rated corporate debt making up $23 trillion of the total.”_

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!r3fl!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F66b22dd2-c475-444f-957a-3d7b2dee2073_982x494.png)

Source: [Tokeny](https://tokeny.com/navigating-the-booming-trend-of-tokenized-t-bills/)

Tokenising a government bond means the government issues the debt instrument in a tokenised form on a blockchain, thus creating a digital token that represents ownership of the government bond. These tokens are distributed to investors digitally and are then held directly in a digital wallet or otherwise by a custodian that offers digital custody. So, could this be one reason why [State Street](https://www.reuters.com/business/finance/custody-giant-state-street-expands-crypto-services-new-partnership-2024-08-20/#:~:text=Aug%2020%20\(Reuters\)%20%2D%20State,financial%20services%20provider%20told%20Reuters.) (with $41trillion of asset under custody) is now looking to offer digital asset custody services? Essentially, tokenised bonds can be traded on digital platforms or exchanges 24/7 365 days a year, enabling faster and more efficient transactions. Settlement of trades can occur almost instantaneously, thanks to the blockchain's ability to record and verify transactions in real time so satisfying the desire of regulators in many jurisdictions to offer delivery v payment and T0 settlement time. The tokenisation of government bonds presents several possibilities that could reshape the landscape of government debt markets and the broader financial system with one of the most significant advantages of tokenised government bonds being the potential to increase market access and liquidity. And, by issuing bonds in tokenised form, governments can reach a broader pool of investors including retail investors who might not have access to traditional bond markets. This democratisation of access can lead to greater participation in government bond markets, increasing liquidity and potentially lowering borrowing costs for governments. Moreover, tokenisation can significantly reduce the costs associated with issuing and trading government bonds. Indeed, Cashlink estimates that the [cost savings could be as much as 1.2% of the value of the debt instrument](https://www.ledgerinsights.com/tokenized-bond-savings-cashlink-estimates/). Traditional bond issuance and trading involve multiple intermediaries, such as banks, clearinghouses and custodians, each of which adds to the overall cost and complexity of the process. Therefore, by leveraging blockchain technology, governments can streamline these processes, reducing the need for intermediaries and lowering transaction costs. Additionally, the automation of coupon payments and settlement through smart contracts can further enhance efficiency.

Blockchain technology's inherent transparency and security features can certainly enhance the trust and integrity of government bond markets; every transaction involving a tokenised bond is recorded on a blockchain, creating a transparent and immutable record of ownership and transfers. This transparency can reduce the risk of fraud, errors and disputes so providing greater confidence to investors. Moreover, the security of blockchain technology, with its decentralised and encrypted structure, can protect against hacking and other cyber threats. It also means that financial markets potentially become less reliant on centralised clearing and depositary services, such as Crest, DTCC and Euroclear. Furthermore, in traditional bond markets, settlement times can take several days during which counterparty risk (i.e. whether the sellers get paid), remains. On the other hand, tokenised government bonds can settle almost instantly since blockchain technology enables real-time verification and recording of transactions; this reduction in settlement time can reduce the need for collateral and free up capital for other purposes. In addition, tokenisation opens the door to the creation of innovative financial products and services - e.g. fractional ownership of government bonds becomes possible through tokenisation, allowing investors to purchase smaller portions of bonds than would be feasible in traditional markets. This could make government bonds more accessible to retail investors and support the development of new investment products, such as bond-backed stablecoins or decentralised finance (DeFi) applications that use tokenised bonds as collateral.

However, whilst the potential benefits of tokenised government bonds are significant, some several challenges and considerations need to be addressed before this innovation can become mainstream, including:

> · **regulatory and legal framework**

The regulatory and legal framework for tokenised government bonds is still in its infancy. Governments and regulatory bodies must develop clear guidelines and standards to govern the issuance, trading and settlement of tokenised bonds. This includes ensuring compliance with existing securities laws, anti-money laundering (AML) regulations and know-your-customer (KYC) requirements. Additionally, the legal status of tokenised bonds must be clearly defined, including the enforceability of smart contracts and the rights of token holders.

> · **technology and infrastructure**

The successful implementation of tokenised government bonds requires robust technology and infrastructure. Governments must ensure that the underlying blockchain technology is secure, scalable and interoperable with existing financial systems. Moreover, the development of user-friendly digital wallets, trading platforms and settlement systems is essential to facilitate the widespread adoption of tokenised bonds. Issues such as network congestion, cyber threats and technical glitches must also be addressed to ensure the reliability and security of tokenised bond markets.

> · **investor protection and education**

As with any new financial innovation, investor protection and education are critical. Retail investors, in particular, may need guidance and education on the risks and opportunities associated with tokenised bonds. Governments and regulators must ensure that adequate disclosure requirements are in place and that investors are fully informed about the nature of tokenised bonds, including their rights and obligations. Additionally, measures must be taken to protect investors from fraud, market manipulation and other risks associated with digital assets.

> · **market adoption and liquidity**

The success of tokenised government bonds depends on the willingness of investors and market participants to adopt this new technology. Whilst tokenisation offers many advantages, it also represents a significant departure from traditional bond markets, which may create resistance among institutional investors, financial institutions and market infrastructure providers. Moreover, the liquidity of tokenised bonds will depend on the level of market adoption and the development of active secondary markets for these assets.

> · **monetary policy and financial stability**

The issuance of tokenised government bonds could have implications for monetary policy and financial stability. Central banks and financial regulators will need to consider how tokenised bonds fit into the broader monetary and financial system, including their impact on interest rates, inflation and capital flows. Additionally, the integration of tokenised bonds into the financial system must be carefully managed to avoid potential risks to financial stability, such as increased volatility, systemic risk or the disruption of traditional financial markets.

Several countries and institutions have already begun exploring the potential of tokenised government bonds, providing valuable insights into the possibilities and challenges of this innovation. In 2018, the World Bank launched the world's first blockchain-based bond, known as [bond-i (blockchain operated new debt instrument)](https://www.treasurydirect.gov/savings-bonds/i-bonds/). The bond was issued and managed entirely on a private blockchain to reduce the costs and complexity of bond issuance. Whilst bond-i was not a government bond, it demonstrated the feasibility of using blockchain technology for debt instruments and provided valuable lessons for future tokenised government bond projects. [In 2021, the European Investment Bank (EIB) issued its first digital bond on a public blockchain](https://cib.bnpparibas/eib-achieves-milestone-with-first-ever-digital-bond-in-british-pounds/). The €100 million bond was issued in collaboration with several major banks and used Ethereum's blockchain to record and settle transactions. The Bank of Thailand has been a pioneer in the exploration of tokenised bonds. [In 2020, the Bank of Thailand launched a blockchain-based platform for the issuance and distribution of government savings bonds.](https://newsroom.ibm.com/2020-10-05-Bank-of-Thailand-Launches-Worlds-First-Government-Savings-Bond-on-IBM-Blockchain-Technology) Developed in collaboration with the private sector, the platform allowed retail investors to purchase government bonds directly through digital channels, with the bonds issued in tokenised form on a blockchain. The project was successful in reducing the time and cost associated with bond issuance and distribution whilst also increasing access to government bonds for retail investors. [In October 2022, Israel’s Ministry of Finance](https://www.globalgovernmentfintech.com/government-blockchain-bonds-breakthroughs/) and the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange announced a pilot for state bond issuance using blockchain technology. In February 2023, Hong Kong authorities marked a significant milestone by issuing the world’s first tokenised green bonds, showcasing the potential for combining sustainability with cutting-edge technology. Finally, Brazil's central bank also intensified its efforts in March 2023 by exploring the tokenisation of federal government bonds, further indicating a shift towards blockchain-based financial instruments. Undoubtedly, these initiatives signal a growing interest in leveraging blockchain for more efficient, transparent and accessible bond markets.

However, the future of tokenised government bonds will depend on several factors, including technological advancements, regulatory developments and market adoption. As the benefits of tokenisation become more apparent, more governments will likely explore the issuance of tokenised bonds. Early adopters may include countries with advanced digital infrastructure and a strong commitment to financial innovation. Over time, as the technology matures and regulatory frameworks are established, tokenised government bonds could become a standard method of debt issuance, alongside traditional bonds. Furthermore, the development of [central bank digital currencies (CBDCs)](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/central-bank-digital-currency-cbdc.asp) could complement the adoption of tokenised government bonds. CBDCs, which are digital forms of a country's currency issued by the central bank, could be used to facilitate the settlement of tokenised bonds, further reducing transaction costs and improving efficiency. The integration of CBDCs with tokenised bonds could also enhance monetary policy implementation and provide new tools for central banks to manage the economy. The successful adoption of tokenised government bonds will require regulatory harmonisation and international collaboration. Governments and regulators will need to work together to establish common standards and frameworks for tokenised bonds, ensuring that these instruments can be issued, traded and settled across borders in a seamless and compliant manner. International collaboration will also be essential to address potential risks, such as market fragmentation, regulatory arbitrage and cybersecurity threats. The adoption of tokenised government bonds will likely drive the evolution of financial market infrastructure, including the development of new trading platforms, settlement systems and custody solutions. Traditional financial institutions such as banks, custodians and exchanges may need to adapt to this new landscape by integrating blockchain technology into their operations or collaborating with fintech companies to offer tokenisation services.

So, as governments consider tokenised bonds, critical questions arise. Can blockchain's promise of lower costs and broader market access truly disrupt the traditional bond market? What new risks emerge with fractional ownership, and how will regulators adapt? Will tokenised bonds reshape monetary policy, especially with the rise of central bank digital currencies (CBDCs)? And, in a globalised economy, can international collaboration prevent market fragmentation and ensure seamless cross-border transactions? Certainly, these issues demand urgent attention as the financial world faces a potential shift towards digital, decentralised systems.
