---
title: "Can DeFi insurance become a mainstream safety net?"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/can-defi-insurance-become-a-mainstream"
---

# Can DeFi insurance become a mainstream safety net?

*By Jonny Fry | *

DeFi insurance is where blockchain-powered smart contracts provide automated insurance and is potentially one of the most innovative but under-used solutions in decentralised finance. Traditional insurance struggles to comprehend DeFi’s unique vulnerabilities, including smart contract exploits and extreme market volatility - in 2022 alone, DeFi protocols witnessed over [$3.1 billion](https://www.cnbc.com/2023/02/04/crypto-investors-lost-nearly-4-billion-dollars-to-hackers-in-2022.html) being lost to hacks with only $34.4 million paid out in claims, meaning 99% of losses went uninsured. So, can new decentralised insurance solutions bridge this gap and become a trusted safety net for regular users, or do they remain a niche tool for insiders? Certainly, the massive exposure to hacks and exploits underscores a fundamental problem: DeFi’s growth is vastly outpacing the market appetite for risk management. [Less than 2% of the $48 billion DeFi ecosystem is covered by any insurance at all](https://www.ainvest.com/news/hyperliquid-40m-loss-cautionary-tale-defi-liquidity-providers-2509/), hence this absence of protection discourages mainstream adoption as retail and institutional investors remain sceptical of platforms that cannot guarantee safety. Furthermore, unlike traditional insurance, which hinges on robust actuarial modelling and

deep capital reserves, DeFi protocols must contend with unpredictable code risk, flash loan exploits and the perennial threat of oracle manipulation. This evolving risk landscape has prompted a new

breed of decentralised insurance protocols seeking to automate underwriting and claims, leverage community governance and tokenise coverage for greater transparency and capital efficiency.

**Nine of the largest DeFi scams/hack in 2025**

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!fiBi!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fe7f259f5-3efc-4801-b50c-14d14bf1d4b1_856x412.png)

Source: [CCN.com](https://www.ccn.com/education/crypto/crypto-hacks-exploits-full-list-scams-vulnerabilities/)

Nexus Mutual is by far [the largest insurer](https://www.coingecko.com/research/publications/decentralized-insurance-deep-dive) (with $288million of cover) compared to the next biggest, Cover (with only $14million). However, other insurers such as AutomationHarbor and InsurAce, along with Nexus and Cover, have attempted to solve two key pain points: speed of payout and complexity of claims adjudication. This innovation is especially critical in a 24/7 market dealing with digital assets which trade globally, where events move much faster than legacy finance. Platforms such as [Cover Protocol](https://messari.io/project/cover-protocol-2/profile) have issued CLAIM and NOCLAIM tokens, creating a market for insurance risk where pay-out eligibility is dynamically adjusted based on event occurrence. This method allowed coverage to be priced and traded like any risk asset, improving capital efficiency - but it has also proved fragile under heavy demand, leading Cover Protocol to eventually cease operations.

Meantime, Risk Harbor exemplifies [parametric,](https://www.aon.com/en/capabilities/risk-transfer/parametric-insurance#:~:text=What%20is%20Parametric%20Insurance?,data%20that%20describes%20the%20event.) code-driven DeFi insurance. Users can buy policies against stablecoin, depegs and protocol exploits with oracles feeding real-time data into smart contracts. Claims are initiated and paid out in seconds if pre-set conditions are met, slashing settlement time to less than a minute versus weeks for typical claims in traditional insurance. This model promises frictionless, objective payouts and dramatically reduced fraud. However, its reliance on oracle integrity creates new risks - if a price feed is compromised, false claims could drain pools or legitimate claims could go unpaid, threatening solvency and trust in the entire system.

Therefore, to mitigate this, protocols often use multi-source oracles and time-weighted averages although technical risk does persist. Nexus Mutual operates as a UK-registered discretionary mutual, pooling capital from members who stake $NXM tokens to underwrite risks on specific protocols. Token holders actively participate in claims votes, offering a human judgment layer for nuanced or ambiguous events. Nexus Mutual itself processed claims for high-profile hacks such as the Euler Finance exploit, when [$197million was stolen](https://www.chainalysis.com/blog/euler-finance-flash-loan-attack/) with payouts often occurring within days.

The benefit of this approach is nuanced decision-making; the downside is potential delays and governance risks. A well-organised campaign of malicious voting could defraud the system if not properly checked by staking requirements and transparency. Moreover, KYC is required for participation in Nexus, limiting its accessibility compared to fully permissionless DeFi platforms.

[InsurAce gained notoriety during the TerraUSD (UST)](https://happycoin.club/en/insurace-pokroet-ubytki-vladelczev-terrausd-na-summu-11-mln/) collapse in May 2022, processing over $11.7 million in payouts to 155 victims within forty-eight hours despite collecting just $94,000 in

premiums. This fast response showcased the strengths of decentralised governance, as $INSUR token holders rapidly assessed and approved claims under clear eligibility criteria. InsurAce’s machine learning-powered risk assessments uses historic exploit data although such data is sparse

for most DeFi protocols. Its portfolio system allows users to buy coverage spanning multiple blockchains and protocol risks in one policy, streamlining insurance complexity for power users and institutions. [Sherlock Protocol](https://sherlock.xyz/) is another example of DeFi insurance and takes innovation further by blending insurance with competitive security auditing. Protocols pay a portion of their total value locked annually, receiving not only insurance coverage and bug bounty funds but also continuous auditing by community contest. Arguably, this preventative model protects more capital by reducing exploit risk before it materialises, shifting the focus from pure risk transfer to proactive risk reduction. DeFi deficits have enjoyed a [90% fall in losses since 2020](https://finance.yahoo.com/news/state-defi-exploit-risk-163836645.html) as daily deficits have fallen from over 30% of 0.0014% by 2024. However, there were [$1.1 billion in reported DeFi exploits and protocol hacks](https://coinlaw.io/defi-vs-traditional-banking-statistics/) in the first half of 2025 whilst traditional banks in the US alone suffered $2.8 in fraud losses in the same period.

Other barriers include regulatory grey zones, technical vulnerabilities in insurer-smart contracts and lack of user adoption, with only 2% of users actively buying coverage. Moreover, premiums may spike in times of high risk or demand, discouraging uptake precisely when insurance is most needed. And, although traditional insurers are beginning to experiment with DeFi coverage, most products remain expensive, difficult to access or unproven at scale. DeFi insurance faces unique regulatory uncertainty: are protocols truly insurers or merely software platforms? Some, such as Nexus Mutual, take legal steps to register as discretionary mutuals but most operate outside established legal categories. The treatment of smart contracts as “legal contracts” will determine long-term adoption and integration with legacy finance. Meanwhile, oracles - sources of data/information relied upon to trigger or validate a claim - remain a single point of technological failure. Manipulation or error in external data feeds can trigger massive false payouts or block legitimate claims, undermining consumer trust and capital reserves. As systems mature, multi-oracle architectures and on-chain dispute resolution may improve reliability but, for now, this remains a critical vulnerability.

Essentially, whilst DeFi insurance is increasingly seen as essential for risk management in digital finance, growth will depend on overcoming these technical, economic and legal obstacles. Some emerging models, such as transaction-level coverage by OpenCover, suggest that insurance could become more granular and accessible, moving closer to mainstream banking guarantees. Traditional insurance providers are watching the space with interest - potential rewards include tapping new asset classes and earning higher investment returns, but only if risk can be understood and managed across interoperable platforms. The road ahead for DeFi insurance remains challenging, yet promising. For now, coverage is best viewed as a specialised tool for those with the expertise and risk appetite to participate. DeFi insurance protocols have delivered real-world protection faster than traditional models in several major incidents but their limitations, tiny market share, technical risk and regulatory uncertainty, mean they are far from a comprehensive shield for all investors. If hybrid solutions can integrate on-chain parametric coverage with off-chain capital and legal clarity, the market may finally cross the chasm from innovative experiment to indispensable mainstream safety net. For DeFi to fulfil its promise of financial freedom, then reliable and scalable insurance must become central to its ecosystem.

If a friend or colleague would like to have their own weekly edition of Digital Bytes, please use this [link](https://digitalbytes.substack.com/) to subscribe.

To listen to the latest Digital Bytes’ Show on Cyber.FM, click [here](https://teamblockchain.net/)