---
title: "NFTs’ impact on scientific research and funding"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/nfts-impact-on-scientific-research"
---

# NFTs’ impact on scientific research and funding

*By Jonny Fry | *

[Non-fungible tokens (NFTs)](https://chain.link/education/nfts) are unique digital certificates stored on a blockchain and represent one-of-a-kind items or pieces of information, making them valuable as proof of ownership for both digital and physical assets. This uniqueness and immutability are what make NFTs particularly useful for ensuring ownership and traceability in various fields, including scientific research. An example of this is the [car industry](https://cointelegraph.com/learn/articles/how-to-use-nfts-as-proof-of-ownership-for-physical-assets) which is using NFTs to prove the provenance of a vehicle together with its service and maintenance records. However, NFTs are different from fungible assets such as cash, or cryptos such as Bitcoins (which can be exchanged on a one-to-one basis), as each NFT is unique and cannot be replaced or exchanged for something identical. This makes NFTs ideal for representing rare items or intellectual property that requires clear ownership records, such as research findings or patents.

NFTs are also becoming [more important in science and academia](https://nftnewstoday.com/2023/08/24/decentralized-science-desi-and-nfts-the-future-of-research/) due to their unique properties - that is, they are unchangeable. Once an NFT is registered on a blockchain, the ownership records are permanent and tamper-proof, making asset history clear and unchangeable. Smart contracts, which automate services such as [royalty payments](https://nftevening.com/nft-royalties/#:~:text=How%20do%20NFT%20royalties%20work,on%20royalties%20for%20supplementary%20income.) and transfer conditions, make NFTs programmable. This simplifies transactions and enforces preset terms, improving their utility. Traceability is another NFT benefit - each NFT's transaction history is maintained on a blockchain, making asset provenance and validity easy to verify. To support scientific research, NFTs are being used to [tokenise IP](https://olartemoure.com/tokenization-of-ip-assets/#:~:text=Tokenization%20allows%20IP%20owners%20to,the%20risk%20of%20IP%20disputes.), safeguard data interchange and enable decentralised funding - researchers may represent patents, datasets and methodologies using NFTs. In addition, tokenising intellectual property allows researchers to trade, license or sell digital representations, enabling new revenue streams and collaboration opportunities. A researcher can mint an NFT with invention and ownership metadata to represent a discovery. This method simplifies traceability, licensing and monetising under-utilised IP. Many research groups use NFTs for patent tokenisation to share their discoveries and foster industry collaboration, and researchers can issue NFTs representing labour shares or rights instead of government subsidies or corporate sponsorships. In turn, the public, investors and philanthropists can acquire these tokens for direct, decentralised finance. This paradigm frees researchers from centralised funding and expands their funding alternatives. A team studying a potential cancer treatment may issue NFTs to raise funds from public investors. In the US, Berkely College in San Francisco sold an NFT (for [$50,000](https://blog.researchhub.foundation/nfts-in-science/)) of documents relating to James Allison’s research into cancer which had won him a Nobel Prize. NFTs can promote citizen science in public research, tokenising contributions to scientific initiatives and research data for anybody to access; science becomes more inclusive and citizen-driven when democratised.

NFTs are also used in research data ownership and sharing; tokenisation allows researchers to communicate data safely and openly whilst limiting access and use. License requirements in NFTs allow researchers to monetise high-value datasets whilst respecting privacy and ethics. Tokenising genetic data or clinical trial outcomes can facilitate research co-operation and protect sensitive data, examples of which we have seen in the [healthcare sector](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11196843/). Undoubtedly, NFTs offer a number of benefits to the scientific community, with one of the most significant advantages being the transparency they provide. Due to the fact that all transactions and ownership changes are recorded on the blockchain, the scientific process becomes more trustworthy, with every asset's history clearly visible and verifiable - a project called [Molecule](https://www.molecule.xyz/) is an example of using IP-NFTs to revolutionise scientific research. Furthermore, NFTs can simplify collaboration by making intellectual property easier to share and license across borders and disciplines; tokenised assets reduce the complexity of IP agreements, encouraging cross-disciplinary and international cooperation. NFTs also foster public engagement with scientific research as, by allowing people to own tokens linked to scientific discoveries, individuals can become more invested in the research process. This model increases public awareness and participation, making scientific projects more accessible and transparent. Additionally, NFTs allow researchers to monetise dormant intellectual property or data, unlocking new revenue streams that might otherwise remain untapped.

NFTs certainly have many benefits but integrating them into scientific study raises ethical issues. IP protection is one concern; minting an NFT for a discovery or dataset poses potential ownership, licensing and infringement challenges as well as new legal frameworks being required to link NFT ownership with intellectual property rules to safeguard artists. Regulatory unpredictability is another issue; NFT regulations are still changing and therefore researchers and investors might incur risks going forward as legislation evolves. Clear NFT issuance and trading rules are also essential for legal clarity and fraud prevention and the digital divide is another barrier because blockchain platforms and NFTs may be unavailable in less developed jurisdictions. To address this, accessibility, education and participation in the burgeoning NFT-driven research environment should be improved. Furthermore, some blockchains (especially proof-of-work ones) are energy-intensive and hence raise environmental concerns, which is why often proof-of-stake is being promoted for blockchain networks to reduce energy use. Finally, tokenising scientific findings raises ethical issues, especially when crucial knowledge is sold; monetisation must follow ethical criteria to protect research integrity and scientific knowledge. Meanwhile, in [medical research](https://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/21/8/965), NFTs can be issued to represent early-stage drug research, offering fractional ownership of the project - this has attracted investors and sped up funding for the research, demonstrating how NFTs can provide an alternative to traditional financing methods. In space exploration, [Copernic](https://www.copernicspace.com/) is using NFTs so allowing enthusiasts to participate in space exploration whilst also funding the necessary equipment upgrades.

With scientific research using NFTs continually evolving, there are significant advances on the horizon. NFT integration with [decentralised science (DeSci)](https://www.coingecko.com/learn/what-is-desci-decentralized-science) is a major trend as it uses blockchain technology to decentralise research funding, publishing and cooperation, whereby giving researchers more autonomy. Science's NFT future will also depend on smart contracts - e.g. researchers will be able to collect royalties or usage fees when their work is used by automating licensing arrangements (they could certainly benefit from simplified intellectual property exchange and licensing). Potentially, NFTs could go beyond datasets and patents - that is, they could reflect experimental techniques, lab equipment use and individual research team contributions in the future. Furthermore, as technology advances, more assets could be tokenised, so giving academics more ways to monetise their findings. NFTs are, indeed, impacting scientific research and funding by introducing transparency, decentralisation and new funding models and, whilst challenges such as regulatory ambiguity and ethical considerations remain, the potential benefits for researchers, investors and the public are immense. As blockchain technology matures and adoption grows, NFTs will become a critical tool in advancing science, fostering collaboration and democratising access to knowledge and innovation.