---
title: "The role of tokenisation in the next financial crisis"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/the-role-of-tokenisation-in-the-next"
---

# The role of tokenisation in the next financial crisis

*By Jonny Fry | *

Financial crises usually spark new ideas, affecting investment markets and how people view money, risk and value. Each catastrophe, from [the South Sea Bubble in the 1700s](https://www.historic-uk.com/HistoryUK/HistoryofEngland/South-Sea-Bubble/) to the [Great Depression in the 1900s](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/g/great_depression.asp) and the [2008 global financial crisis](https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/economics/2008-2009-global-financial-crisis/), has highlighted how susceptible the financial system was and, as a result, demanded new regulations and procedures. As the world explores tokenisation (the process of translating asset ownership rights into blockchain-based digital tokens), we are again on the verge of transformation and being able to track and monitor assets in real time. It is not _if_ tokenisation will change finance, that is obvious, but _how_ tokenisation will play out in the next financial crisis which is most essential. Will it make markets more stable by increasing accessibility, liquidity and openness? Will it worsen shortcomings by adding risks, spreading disease faster and involving regular investors in intricate assets they do not understand?

Major financial crises

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!BytC!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F8f446366-f81c-4abe-9d8e-0e55a2117150_2048x2048.png)

In essence, modern markets run on liquidity. The [2008 Lehman Brothers collapse and credit freeze](https://www.investopedia.com/articles/economics/09/lehman-brothers-collapse.asp) illustrated how catastrophic money shortages may be. Institutions could not secure short-term loans, investors cashed out and asset prices dropped without buyers. However, tokenisation claims to make hard-to-sell assets such as real estate, art, private equity and luxury products, easier to trade - these assets can be fractionally owned and traded as digital tokens and using automatic market makers (AMMs) digital assets can be traded 24/7 globally. Hence, in a crisis, this liquidity may help stabilise markets by allowing investors to escape opaque, illiquid markets, many of which still have limited trading hours. Consider a bearish period for equities when traditional stock markets are uncertain and investors desire to diversify; tokenised assets exchanged 24/7 on global digital platforms may act as safety valves, providing investors various choices for funding; and selling sections of a building, artwork or wine collection. This could help people raise capital they need without having to sell everything at once, so avoiding crystalising significant capital gains taxes But liquidity has pros and cons, and its ease of sale may worsen matters. Selling difficulties in conventional illiquid markets slow price declines and panicking investors may rush to the exits faster, deeper and more randomly. Thus, tokenisation may worsen crises.

Another benefit of tokenisation is clarity. A lack of transparency in mortgage-backed securities and derivatives exacerbated the [2008 crisis](https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2008/06/pdf/kodres.pdf) \- investors did not know the assets’ quality, and institutions distrusted each other’s balance sheets. Trust collapsed, stopping the system and forcing central banks to step in and become lenders of last resort. However, blockchain technology ensures unchangeable transaction, ownership and an asset history of ownership - all in real time. Tokenisation may help individuals understand what is being exchanged, who owns it and its value for the first time; this information could help investors and regulators assess risks and make sensible crisis decisions. Furthermore, better price discovery is possible. Global tokenised marketplaces operate in real time and, without territorial or time-zone restrictions, digital tokens can trade on many exchanges - this could speed up pricing changes as new information arrives, whereby reducing distortions and bottlenecks. However, openness is not automatic. How tokenised assets are set up matters - that is, if tokenisation adds complexity by separating assets without properly identifying risks, custodianship or valuation procedures, it could be similar to the structured finance errors that caused the 2008 crisis. A digital token connected with a Miami high-end property is only as trustworthy as the systems that check its value, maintain it and enforce token holders’ rights. And, without controls, the illusion of openness may be worse than being opaque - highlighted as potential threat for financial markets in a speech by Jonathan Hall, special advisor for the Bank of England, titled[ ‘Monster of the deep’.](https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2024/may/jon-hall-speech-at-the-university-of-exeter)

In theory, tokenisation is great for making things accessible for everyone since it allows individual investors to access those asset classes previously reserved for the wealthy or institutional elite. Tokenised real estate platforms allow contributions of a few hundred dollars, compared to millions before. Moreover, this democratisation may increase wealth-generating opportunities in stable times since, in a crisis, democratisation could massively expose everyone. Regular investors could panic and lose money if they own tiny amounts of volatile or illiquid assets, without risk models or professional advice. Social and financial risk also exists here - when regular investors lose large sums of money, it can damage financial systems, provoke political backlash and worsen a slump. Regular investors suffered the most when many popular [crypto platforms collapsed in 2022,](https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/chicago-fed-letter/2023/479#:~:text=The%20first%20shock%20was%20the,as%20shown%20in%20figure%203.) whilst institutional investors fled early or hedged their risks. And this illustrates the pattern - tokenisation may equalise rewards in good times and hardship in bad times, however, when systems function together, tokenisation works.

Tokens can represent assets that can be transferred between platforms and used as collateral in lending systems. Collaboration fosters new ideas, but it may also spread disease in times of hardship. Think about how [2008 mortgage-backed securities](https://bfi.uchicago.edu/insight/research-summary/mortgage-backed-securities-and-the-financial-crisis-of-2008-a-post-mortem/) spread global danger. Tokenisation could accelerate this trend, spreading risks from one market to others. If tokenised real estate values plummet, lending methods that employ them as collateral may be affected and this could extend to other tokenised asset markets. The fact that blockchain markets are global and available 24/7 exacerbates this problem - regular markets close at the end of the day, giving market participants time to reflect, but tokenised markets do not. And when horror spreads swiftly via social media, feedback loops can be unpleasant and fast. Arguably, regulation will determine if tokenisation stabilises the next crisis since current tokenised asset rules are inconsistent. Some jurisdictions have extensive tokenised securities regulations, whilst others are yet to implement such clarity. However, a global system without harmonisation is risky. Ambiguous regulatory provisions may frighten people in a weak economy and people who own tokens may sell them quickly if they are unsure of their legal rights, which could make the market more volatile. Nonetheless, well-thought-out policies certainly improve investor confidence by providing clarity and options in difficult times.

Meanwhile, many worry that tokenisation would promote instability, but it could also help manage crises. Tokenised systems may help governments and central banks distribute aid, manage debt and stabilise markets. Central banks may buy tokenised real estate or corporate debt directly to inject money into markets faster. Tokenised systems might distribute money to selected populations more accurately, making targeted stimulation easier. Tokens with expiration dates or usage limits, (“use it or lose it”) could make fiscal policy more flexible and effective during downturns. Tokenising national debt or infrastructure projects could provide governments more crisis funding choices and this might attract investors and lower borrowing costs. However, these benefits only apply to dependable and robust tokenised systems. If breaches, operational issues or frauds make users distrust blockchain networks, they will not work when needed. So, tokenisation goes beyond technical considerations and makes us question capitalism in terrible times. Money and morals are both at stake in crises - they reveal how societies absorb losses and protect the weak. Furthermore, tokenisation alters ownership in new ways; there are hundreds of tiny investors who own Warhol paintings or skyscrapers worldwide. So, if value lowers, who is responsible? And when some investors lose everything and others regard losses as small portfolio changes, who ensures fairness? These questions certainly define legitimacy - if tokenisation spreads wealth more equitably, market failures may cause more disappointment. Moreover, the attractiveness of tokenisation may worsen its political implications in times of distress; how societies address these concerns will determine whether tokenisation strengthens or weakens capitalism’s social compact.

Certainly, tokenised assets could strengthen and open markets by making them more liquid, transparent and accessible but the system may become less stable by increasing market volatility as programmable AI driven trading takes over. Decisions today will decide tokenisation’s stability or instability; hence regulators must protect people whilst encouraging innovation. And custodians must be transparent - investors should know that fractional ownership shifts risk, not eliminates it. History indicates that financial discoveries are never wholly good or bad; how communities employ them matters. Tokenisation might make capitalism more open and stable, or not, in the next financial crisis, but at least it offers investors a choice of how to access assets. No one is being compelled to trade and own tokenised equities, bonds, commodities, real estate, etc - but, for some, the ability to do so and trade 24/7 on digital platforms or on a peer-to-peer basis is highly appealing.