---
title: "What is a block? The DNA of every blockchain transaction"
author: "Jonny Fry"
date: ""
source: "https://digitalbytes.substack.com/p/what-is-a-block-the-dna-of-every"
---

# What is a block? The DNA of every blockchain transaction

*By Jonny Fry | *

Although blockchains such as[ Bitcoin](https://www.bitcoin.com/) popularised the notion of blocks, their impact is felt much further than online currencies. They support distributed ledgers running supply chains, medical data, digital identity and others. The core structure of a block is a[ digital container ](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/block-bitcoin-block.asp)that stores a group of verified transactions. Each block is made up of two significant components, the body and the header. Each header has [metadata](https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/metadata#:~:text=Metadata%20is%20information%E2%80%94such%20as,for%2C%20organize%20and%20use%20data.) that ensures the status of the block on the chain - which can be a time stamp, a unique cryptographic hash and the hash of the previous block. These factors make all blocks verifiable and linked to their predecessor in time sequence. The body of the block contains the data of the actual transaction - in cryptocurrency networks, this usually includes address of sender and receiver, the amount to be transferred and the cryptographic signatures. In other applications, there may be supply chain updates, medical records or IoT-based entries in the body. The design guarantees that every transaction in a block is allied together and stored permanently after validation. This separation between header and body enables blocks to be both lightweight to be checked by the network and to be robust enough to serve as a tamper-resistant historical record. Any modification to any single block of a blockchain modifies the hash of the block, breaking the chain and leaving any illegal update traceable.

**The amount a Bitcoin miner earns for each block**

[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!Fr7t!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F926bfef6-0087-42c0-8647-c2eba72a17b9_836x334.png)

Source: [EY](https://www.ey.com/en_ch/insights/blockchain/the-bitcoin-halving-explained)

The [cryptographic relationship](https://egovstandards.gov.in/sites/default/files/2023-05/Blockchain%20Cryptographic%20Security%2C%20Hashing%20and%20Digital%20Signature.pdf) between a block and other blocks is what makes it more than a digital ledger entry. Each new block also refers to the hash of the previous block and this makes a secure connection, in effect meaning each block of data is linked/chained together which in effect constitutes a blockchain. This connectivity reveals that modifying a single block would necessitate the alteration of all the following blocks - a near impossibility without a vast amount of computing strength. Furthermore, these sequential chains resemble pages of a paper ledger except there are better fortifications. Block counting is carried out, not by the simple values of page numbers but by cryptographic hashes calculated based on the contents of the block as well as the previous hash. The output is a chronological and immutable chain of records that is both transparent and secure and difficult to attain with [centralised databases.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Centralized_database) The connection also allows each member of the network, or nodes, to have a copy of the ledger. Even in the case of a new block being introduced, the consensus mechanism of the blockchain network allows all the legitimate nodes to agree that the new block is valid before adding it into the chain. This non-authoritative validation mechanism is what makes blockchain systems trust less.

A block is created by starting with the gathering of unauthenticated transactions in a pool called the mempool. The transactions are waiting to be selected by network participants, miners in [proof-of-work systems](https://www.coinbase.com/learn/crypto-basics/what-is-proof-of-work-or-proof-of-stake) or validators in proof-of-stake systems - the selected transactions are grouped into a candidate block that should then be subjected to a validation process. In a proof-of-work blockchain such as[ Bitcoin](https://cointelegraph.com/learn/articles/proof-of-stake-vs-proof-of-work:-differences-explained), miners are contesting to solve a difficult mathematical problem through the use of a variable, known as a nonce. The miner who has the correct solution first is given the privilege to append the block to the blockchain and is compensated with newly issued cryptocurrency and transaction fees. However, the amount of the reward (i.e. the number of Bitcoins earnt decreases over time, see chart above) and by [2140, all the 21million Bitcoins](https://www.gemini.com/en-GB/cryptopedia/how-many-bitcoins-are-left#:~:text=The%20last%20Bitcoin%20is%20expected,transactions%20and%20maintain%20the%20blockchain.) will have been mined. The cryptographic difficulty is such that it takes an immense amount of computation to generate a block, which adds an additional level of protection to the network. The validation process in systems of proof-of-stake is different. In this case, validators are chosen to form new blocks according to how much cryptocurrency they put or bet as security. The method is less energy intensive (and it may speed up block production) but broaches the issue of possible centralisation because those with more at stake tend to have a higher opportunity of validating blocks.

[Block size is also an important factor](https://cointelegraph.com/explained/block-size-and-scalability-explained) that will determine the number of transactions that a network can support per given time. To illustrate, the 1MB block size limit which was introduced by Bitcoin as a security measure against spam attacks was a major bottleneck as the number of transactions rose. The network has a constrained ability to support about 3-7 transactions per second, far less than traditional payment networks. Where space is limited in the block, the scarcity of space in a block results in the competition to be part of the subsequent block, which increases the transaction costs. Unsurprisingly, this has generated a debate, with some arguing that making block size bigger may be the solution to congestion, or that it may lead to the loss of decentralisation as fewer individuals are able to operate full nodes; greater storage and bandwidth are needed in larger blocks and so may limit participation to better-endowed operators. To mitigate these constraints, there are a number of scaling solutions, which have been suggested to developers. Others, such as [segregated witness (SegWit)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SegWit) changed the storage format of transaction data so as to add capacity without actually expanding block size. Other networks, including layer-2 networks such as the Lightning Network, decentralise smaller transactions by storing them on smaller blocks that only store final settlement information on the main chain.

The core of the block design controversy is usually known as the [blockchain trilemma](https://www.theblock.co/learn/249536/what-is-the-blockchain-trilemma) and is the problem of decentralisation versus security as well as security versus scalability. A network that is highly decentralised is also likely to have a slow speed since each node will need to authenticate each block. Increasing the speed may involve decreasing the count of validators, which may undermine decentralisation and, possibly, security. Through the trilemma, it is emphasised that the arrangement of blocks is not only a technical issue but a form of government decision - various blockchains have different trade-offs that focus on their objectives. Another example is that Bitcoin considers speed as secondary to security and decentralisation (and more modern blockchains impair this value) making compromises to decentralisation. Innovations (e.g.[ sharding](https://www.rapidinnovation.io/post/what-is-sharding-in-blockchain), which divides blockchains into smaller chunks verifying transactions in parallel) are planned to address these trade-offs in the future. Other designs such as the [directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) ](https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/directed-acyclic-graph)do not use block structures at all, with transactions in each other confirming one another in a web-like topology, instead of sequential blocks.

In essence, blocks are not merely containers of information; they are also the core of the economic incentives that operate blockchain networks. In cryptocurrency systems, miners and validators are rewarded, by being given new tokens/coins for each block they add. Such incentives will ensure participants provide computing power or stake to sustain the running and securing of the network. Meanwhile, as previously mentioned, the Bitcoin blockchain reduces the number of new coins being created as time passes by with predetermined halving of the reward system - this structure causes scarcity to the asset but also changes the incentive structure to more reliance on transaction fees in the long-term. And although other blockchains modify rewards in a different way or with hybrid models, the idea is the same: blocks bind blocks security, validation and compensation. [Cryptographic hashing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographic_hash_function) is also used to protect blocks by rendering it computationally infeasible to manipulate recorded data. When an entry is altered in any transaction, the hash of the block is modified to cause a break in the connection with the subsequent block and hence raise an alarm to the network. This system, based on consensus rules, makes it practically impossible to alter the historical blocks.

Without doubt, due to the increasing use of blockchain, there will be a continuous improvement of the blocks to address the requirement of speed, efficiency and privacy - its developers are considering more sophisticated cryptographic methods such as [zero-knowledge proofs](https://chain.link/education/zero-knowledge-proof-zkp) to enable blocks to confirm that a transaction is valid without disclosing sensitive information. In the meantime,[ layer-2 scaling solutions](https://cointelegraph.com/learn/articles/a-beginners-guide-on-blockchain-layer-2-scaling-solutions) and sharded systems are transforming the contents and workings of blocks. In addition to financial transactions, blocks are increasingly being part of applications in supply chains, healthcare and digital identity. In such a situation, blocks can be used as verifiable containers of various types of data, such as product histories, patient records and authentication credentials. This movement is an indicator that blocks will have a future much more than the payments in cryptocurrency. With blockchain steadily growing beyond cryptocurrencies, there are questions that need an answer, including: how will block design change to offer the three elements of speed, security and decentralisation without sacrificing one of them? And, will the block itself be replaced in the future by new data structures or will novel techniques such as sharding and zero-knowledge proofs transform the purpose of the block? The responses could certainly be the future of blockchain as well as the future of building trust in digital economies.